104-10119-10247
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Mieed 16 Dec 1962 Reviewing inprecaition
RETRUAN TO CIA
J
Gavee
155769
Background Use Only
Subject advised that Aline MOSEY was a newspaperman in SCHAPIRO 6th Noi Reproducce
office. MUDEY, durine the past year, had been in the hospital on several
occasions, and one didn't see too much of her. Subject also advised that
MOSEY stuck mostly to the foreign circuit rather than the Embassy circuit.
Subject stated that one of the reasons MOSEY was in the hospital, on one
occasion, was the fact that she had an abortion, according to gossip.
Subject stated that another newspaperwomen in Moscow was Priscilla
JOHNSON. Subject advised that JOHNSON had the reputation of being a farly
room reporter and one whoa the Soviets kept on a month to month visa basis.
Subject indicated that it was highly possible the Soviets had attempted to
recruit JOHNSON, as she spent a lot of time with Soviet nationals.
subject was quoried as to whether he had ever made an unauthorized
disclosure of classified information in the Soviet Union, to which he re-
plied that he had not disclosed classified information as such. He stated
that his cover, which he had used for the period in between State Depart-
ment assignments, was that he was a (consultant of the AEC, particularly 24
to the Joint Atomic energy Intelligence Committee) composed of AEC, CLA,
State, NCA, Joint. Chiffs, and the Armed Services. Subject stated that he
had intiated to individuals, when questioned, that he had done economic
research and analysis in the Soviet field and that he had done this ever
since he had first become a Stat a Department of employees. Subject stated that,
amorr other, he had discussed this with Mary RUTHINS, his counterpart in
the British Banbasy
66/08
Subject was asked for his itinerary on his return trip to the United
States and who authorized the trip. Subject stated that he had long planned
to come home via the Far Last, and it was a well publicized plan, lie stated
that when ho left. Moscow, he stayed over in Delhi for a week to see if there
were any objections from Headquarters as to his itinerary, Ho stated that
when he received no instructions to the contrary, he returned to the United
States via his previously announced plans and the differenoo in fares being
hormo be him.
subject departed lncow 1 September 1960 (1.00 A.l.i.); wont to Tashkent
and then to which there he spent one week; Bankrok, 4 days; Saigon, 6 days;
1960, : 2 days; Tokyo, 5 days; lawail, 5 days; San Francisco, 5 days;
lor Atrile, 2 days; Las Vegas, 2 days; Denver, 10 days; arrived Washington
24 October 1960.
12
4
6R


