104-10163-10065
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
Formen- Carthels
able personal courage, good security and common sense. In my mind he
is the ideal type of Latin American agent. It will be a real loss: to
the Agency if we lose sight or contact with Adclfo. I have not few men
more dedicated and more loyal.
5. Jarron UnifEUL leasala
AMFAN-). Renrived by 1200.2 and as
close t-cach other that we referred to them as the "seld best Timo.
Ramon. was in the sniping business in iavana in: eventuily had to
leave. He lost his hore, cars, furnishins, etc. his :im is now
planning to send him to Nicaragua, and I rave recommended him to the
sugar. He said he said: "Fertail" He has all the qualities acribed to
Adolfo SAN FELAY (see the) event that he has never been an interim
citizen. He appeaks excellent English. He is dedicated, courageous and
most anxious to maintain contact with the Agency. It will be our loss
if this is not done.
6. Repard L. Barker. AMCLATTRE-L. Wife: Clara. Barker is a
Cubans. a American. Ex-Captain in the U.S.A.P. See Pkg and 201 for full
bod statement. He noted herker in 1955, and he served feithfully until
he had to exfiltrate the industry. He said he said he said he had
valuable agents for the Station (including AMCLATTRE-LS) and
had an amasing encyclopedic knowledge of cuban persons, events and con-
tacts in all value of ife. He was a boxing manger and knew intimately
the industry. He said he said he said in the sporting industry. He had a nopy-
dog loyalty to his case off the industry. He said he said he is biggest weakness
was his lack of discretion. He was such a loyal America. He was
not technically) that he would fight at the rcp of a hat if anyone cast
asperations on the United States or its leaders. In the atmosphere of
the industry, he said he said he said he said he said he said the
process of helping him recover his lost intimates often. as are in the
Station response I would certainly vormond that we continues to vennain
contact with Farker. If nothing else he would mase a wonderful leg-men
for the Chief of Station. His wife is an attractive Dian el who is bi-
tively. He said he said he said the industry. He said he said he
by language, could cas sit to as an American or a 'dawn - a genuine
asset if he could be taught to the nation.
7. Manolo VISA Hrill I ret Manolo through Jorme LAVUS TIOL
(who a professor in Cuba as a result of the 17th of April invasion)
Manolo is working for us now in Piam. and I presume we have full de
date on him. Manolo's fairly owned, along with Eapurite Cenai, the big
steel plant in Havana which was nationalize] by the Castro: regime (Cia.
and the other store, 3.A.). Manolo has a brother, mitryy (Wt would
also be worth a strong. Through his business an: family corrections
Monolo knew a great mack. He said he said the American's interest. One of his
friends was David VALVADOR, although also did not share ACHADOR's
political thinking (extreme left and anoral opinion). Parolo we
objective a reporter as I have ever encountered being let
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
SECRET
Do Not Reproduce
3190


