104-10662-10062
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
FATED STATES DEPARTMENT OF INSTELE
FEDERAL
Newark, New Jersey
In Reply, Pleas Refer
August 18, 1960
File No.
SECRET
LAZARO FDDY
ESPIONAGE - CUPA
NK T-1, a Cuban refugee who is in a position to
furnish reliable information, advised as follows:
On August 4, 1969, the source was contacted
by telephone at his place of employment in Carlstadt, New Jersey,
by Lazara Eddy Espinosa Bonet, Third Secretary to the
Cuban Mission to the United Nations (CMN). Espinosa
requested the source to meet him at 11:00 AM, August 5;
1983, on the corner of Bronx Park East and Allerton
Avenue, Bronx, New York. The source went to designated
meet area on August 5, 1960, arriving at approximately
10:50 AM and remaining until 11:25 AM. No attempt to
contact source was made during that interval.
On August 11, 1969, source's wife received a
telephone call at the source's home, in Union City, New
Jersey, from an individual who did not identify himself.
A message was left for source which instructed him to
appear at the previously mentioned meet location at
11:00 AM, August 12, 1969.
The source arrived at the meet site at the
intersection of Bronx Park East and' Allerton Avenue,
Bronx, New York, at approximately 10:30 A1, whereupon he
was immediately contacted by Espinosa, who had been
waiting in a parked car on Allerton Avenue, Espinosa
and source proceeded on foot a short distance toward the
interior of Bronx Park and sat down on the grass in a
shady area. Espinosa took out from a small handbag which
he was carrying a Sony Miniature Tape Recorder which
measured approximately 9 inches by 4 inches by 3 inches.
The tape recorder was placed between the two on the grass
as they talked. The source observed approximately 20 small
reels of tape in the bag carried by Espinosa.
SECRET
5
GROU? 1
201 - 816438
thirseens to be a different
Excluded from automatic
source than the prior
downgrading and
and
and
47 thay
declassification
535-66-47
# 5615


14-00000
AZAIAO JENY ENPTROSA BONET
SECRET
During the ensuing conversation which lasted
from 10:30 M until 7:30 PM, the source counted three
or four reels of tape utilized by Espinosa and each reel
would record for about one hour, or approximately thirty
minutes on each side. Espinosa, whose true identity had
not been revealed to the source, requested him to call
him "Escteban," Referring to a report prepared by source
and deft at a drop site in Union City, New Jersey, on
May 18, 1969, Espinosa stated that the report had been
poorly prepared and lacked necessary detail. He directed
the source to be more specific and thorough in answering
any questions for future reports.
Espinosa proceeded to review with the source
the information furnished by source in the previous report.
Espinosa was quick to cite any small discrepancy between
the information contained in the report and that which was
furnished by the source during their conversation.
Espinosa queried the source in connection with
individuals in Miami with whom the source had been familiar.
The questions concerning these individuals included their
current addresses, general background and sympathies,
activity in Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) operations,
etc.
Espinosa displayed a photograph of (First Name
Unknown) Mellado and asked source if he recognized him.
Mellado was described as male, of Caucasian race, who
appeared to be Cuban, 32-35 years old, husky build, dark
hair and dark eyes. The source could not recognize the
individual photographed.
Espinosa made several inquiries about "Frank",
a non-existent individual who the source intentionally
included in his prior report as a principal agent for CIA.
The source advised Espinosa that he met "Frank" on only
two or three occasions and knew nothing more specifically
about him.
While the source was answering a question
concerning an individual named "Piche", Espinosa inadvertently
referred to "Piche" as Bifianio Romero, which the source
knew as the true name of "Piche." Romero is known by
Espinosa to have been previously cunnected with CIA
Bowne of Aha-20
SECRET
2


14-00000
LAZARO
Hary ESDINOSA BONET
SECRET
operations in office as well as the Miami area. He was
especially interested in whether the source lnew any
dates of for the,ning infiltration runs into Cuba in which
Romefore might be involved.
Espinosa mentioned Raul Villavorde and asked
the source if Rafael Villaverde is the brother of Raul.
He further questioned the source whether or not Raul
is still a CIA instructor in the use of explosives.
The fact that Raul was in any way connected with instruction
in the use of explosives was never mentioned previously
by source in his report and must have been obtained by
Espinosa from other sources.
The source happened to mention "La Osa", a
nickname for a past team member for infiltration runs
into Cuba. Referring to "La Osa", Espinosa interrupted
and stated "On, Filiberto Lcou Delgado." Source had
forgotten the true name of "La Osa" and said that this
identity must have been furnished to Espinosa through
other sources.
Also asked of the source was whether Justo
Luis Liorett, a colleague of source, was still operating
for CIA. The source replied he did not know, inasmuch as
he had been too long removed from Miami area to be accurate
in his reply.
Espinosa made inquiries on the following
individuals with whom the source had been thought to
associate in Miami area; specifically, he wanted to know
any background information and whether or not the individuals
were being directed by CIA:
Otto (Last Name Unknown), previously of
operational interest to CIA in the Miami area.
Javier Souto, previously a principal agent
in the Miami area for CIA.
Edgar Sopo, active in anti-Castro radio
broadcasts to Cuba from the Miami area.
Manuel Artimes, a leader in Bay of Pigs
Invasion and subsequently connected with anti-Castro
organizations, including MRR.
3
SECRET


14-00000
LAXANO
SICROET
Arture Mollin, performed infiltration operations
into Cubs with source. Eppinosa specifically indicated that
source was to attempt to nalo contact with Lallon to get any
information of value when in the Lann area.
Dr. Pafal. Lollins Salvuceda, previously
attached to anti-Castro revements and alleged to be
of operational value to CIA.
Andres Hocaro, Brown by Eppincon to have
participated in CIA directed operations in Africa. Source
was directed to specifically contact haoaro for any informa-
tion of value portaining to CIA activity when in the Miani
area.
Caridad Gomales Kchin, involved with
exfiltration runs from Cuba.
Heriberto Dalgido, a cousin of source who
lives in Yecnucin, a brother of Adolfo Dalgado who was
killed in 1987 during an asculit on the Estista Palace
in Cuba. He is thought by the source to be a communist.
Source furnished little information regarding
the above individuals and used as an excuse that although
he was on close terms with most of then, he has had little
or no contact with then since leaving the Liami area.
Of all the individuals named by Espinosa, he
appeared nost concerned in obtaining any information on
Dr. Cesar Earo and Dr. Fernando Cabozzi. Both individuals
had been associates of the source in Havana and Cabozas
had worked with the source in Havana. He Advised Espinosa
that all though both are known to be anti-Castro, he did not
feel either had any connection with CIA.
4
SECRET


14-00000
LAZANO DEDEY
SECRET
On at least three occasions, Jepinees added
the source about the degree of fluency of the latter's
spotes and vittos English and asked if he is able to
rolate with Americans. He was secondingly impressed vicon
the source ancered affinatively and complained that he
had attended night t chool in the New Jorsey area.
Espinesa queried the source about sano
infiltration runs into Cula that the source had led.
Espinesa mentioned specific runs in which the source
participated which had not been unticiced previously
by the source. lie seared to be very vall prepared and
gave the impression that he knew the answers to all the
questions directed at the source. Ho was interested in
any problems that the source's team night have exporicned
when entering and leaving Cuna during CIA operations.
He inquired about the control methods of CIA
infiltration tears, whether members of the tears were
ever curcilled in the United States, the chain of command
for a tean, and to when team leaders report. The source
answered that each reberer was responsible caly to himself.
concerning security rules on the nothor vessel during
infiltration and confirmation operations, the source stated
that each tean lancer was responsible for the performance
of his team and each team member was held responsible for
each piece of equipment issued to him.
Source was requested to identify any mother
vessel, the bases from which they operate, and the crew
members. The source stated he could not answer these
questions due to the length of tise passed since the source
was connected with CIA operations in liami.
The source was further questioned regarding the
methods of infiltration into Cuba, (the role of the nother
vessel, interneclary vessels, landing crafts, and the
establishment of intelligence nets inside Cuba. Apparently
noting that the source was not furnishing full details of
the question, Espinesa interpretad and requested the
source to verify Espinence explanation. Espinosa proceeded
to relate concisely the plans and nothods utilized in CIA
operations.
5
SECRET


14-00000
LAZARO EERY ESPINOSA DONT
SECRET
Asford how terms vere able to build sheds
and living quarters in the improvee stamps inside of
Cuba without being noticed by maitice in the same area,
the source replied that everyone in the vicinity of the
infiltration point vere supathetic to the teams. The
source esprined that one person in charge of an education
post appreciamently one mile away from one infiltration
point cooperated with the teams and was later taken out
of Cuba by the source.
Espinosa asked if there are still any collaborators
or persons sympathetic to the United States Government on
the Cuban court with whom the infiltratione worked. Source
replied that to his knowledge all these who were of
assistance have been either jailed or killed.
Espinosa was also concerned about the
employment of CIA personnel in the keys off of Florida
and asked the source as to why CIA would maintain personnel
in that area. Source stated he did not know unless it
was to guard against infiltration by Cuban fishing vessels.
Questioned again about his reasons for
cooperating with the CUBN, the source replied that he is
an individual completely independent of any political
belief. He said that he was initially motivated against
the regime of Fidel Castro because he had seen his parents
work hard and save for 40 years in order to afford a few
luxuries in their later lives, only to see the Cuban
Government intervene and claim possession of everything,
including their home. He further explained that it
appears the United States will never force Castro out of
Cuba but that the fact remains he is Cuban and Cuba is
his fatherland. He said he is willing to cooperate only
to the extent that his parents will receive fair treatment
from the Cuban Government.
Espinosa had information that the source was
suspected at one time by Cubans in Miami of possibly
being connected with the Cuban C-2, which information
caused a United States Government investigation. Source
replied that this was probably due to his number of
successful runs into Cuba without incident which proapted
others to suspect he had to have connections with G-2.
6
SECRET


14-00000
LAZARO ERY ESPUROSA BONF
SECRET
On one run, the source was out of contact with CIA for
ten days which added further to the possibility that he
had either checked or was working with G-2. Most of the
rumors vere quolled heaever when he submitted to a CIA
lie detection test which resulted negatively. He credited
his ability to avoid subches and misfextume to the experience
he had in infiltration cerorises as well as extensive
CIA training.
Apprecimately one half hau of the meeting
between the source and Enpinosa entailed ascertaining the
proficiencies of the source in the training of dicolitions
radio operation, weapory, seamanship, etc., which he
received from CIA. Nothing vas mentioned concerning any
intentions by CHUN to utilize the source in connection
with any of his previously mentioned fields of training.
The source informed Espinesa that he had been
contated since their last meeting by Jose Ramon Engues,
who is currently reorganizing the Vanguardia Revolucionaria
Cubana, an anti-Castro organization. The source has been
designated by Egues to lead the military action of the
organization. It vas explained to Espinesa that Egues has
goals of ultimately boahing the CHUN at New York City by
means as yet not disclosed to the source. The source was
instructed that in the future he is to spend as such time
as possible with Egues in determining that organization's
plans of action against the CHUN and Government of Cuba.
At different times throughout the meeting,
Espinosa was observed to lean back on the ground which
exposed a weapon tucked inside his trousers at the waist,
which was described by the source to be a black Waltham
9MM Automatic Pistol.
At a point of about two hours through the
intervicr, Espinesa took the source on foot to the Allerton
Luncheonetic at 629 Allerton Avenue, where each bought
a fountain drink. While the source sat at the bar,
Espinosa went into one of the two telephone booths located
necarest the rear wall of the luncheonette. He was in the
booth about 30 seconds but did not make a call. He did
not indicate his reason for entering the booth. Finishing
their drink, they returned to a shady area in the same section
7
SECRET


14-00000
JAZAZO
of the prole and contiend their discuasion. At this
point the conce noted for the finnt the A person of
Cubon the in the and the andy pale beach vho
reconded in the and threugh the ande reeting. The
source supported this 1 anen as being conected with
counctr
Espinness in the source to parrere in
report from the the second portion of the
list of questions unandied to the litter on lry 13, 1969.
The in report can are to be placed in on empty
cigarotte peckage and cropped at 11:00 All on August 20,
1960, or August 25, 1960, lehind an iron gate fence at
the the orcer of Herex Park Fant at Alkston Avenue,
from the to five fact north of the concrete store pillar
which nuchors the fence. The source is to return to the
drop site at 1:00 P1 to check if the drop was covered.
Two dates for the pickup were provided in the event there
were too many persons in that area to rilc covering the
drop.
Espinera nold the source if he would be
agrecable to go to 111111 for a routh in an effort to
contact firnce and of CIA. The source
stated he was not, in view of his family and cajloyment
obligations, but agreed to go for : short peried, possibly
three or four cys. Espinican told hin lat while in
Main, the source's mission vould consist of determining
current setivitien of the CIA, identitics of any new CIA
teens, Jcientitica of Government vessels currently in or
out of revvice, ner principal agents, CIA instuctors,
and any CIA estivities including the deplorent of Cubans
to South American regions for CIA operations.
The cate agreed upon on which source will go
to Hami is August 25, 1969, but the source vill indicate
to Espinosa in the report to be left at the next drop that
he vill dely his departure until Saturday morning,
August 30, 1960, in order to pick up his next pay check,
and vill not return until Tuesday norning, September 2, 1969.
The source ves instructed by Espinosa to neet 1811 following
his retura to Nov Jorrecy at 11:00 All on September 17 or
September 20, 1969, at the intersection of Gun Hill Read and
White Plains Rond, Now York, at which time recults of the
Miani mission will be disclosed.
8
SECRET


14-00000
LAZARO
The source suggested that the next meeting
take place in Carlsutdt, New Jersey, to which suggestion
Espinosa replied he does not like to schedule regitings
in New Jersey unless absolutely necessery.
This document contains neither recommendations
por conclesion of the 181. It is the property of the FBL
and is loend to your agency: it and its contents are
not to be distributed outside your agency.
9*
SECRET


