104-10183-10439
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
RETURN TO GIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
SECRET.
Hearay
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT:
Contact Report. Meeting with AMWHIP-1
DATE
:
21 May 1965, 1300-1430 hours
PLACE : National Airport
PRESENT
Subject and DiUbaldo as Breitheim
1. On 20 May I phoned Subject and requested that he travel to
Washington to discuss the background of his discussions with
02 UNBNAFU-19 from which stemmed the suggestion that A-1 supply a
French-English-Spanish speaking secretary to 1019's mission in
Paris. The meeting was quitts short for as it turned out, the
discussion between Subject and (1019 on the topic of secretaries had
taken place in March 1965 and had been little more than a casual
sort of thing devoid of any specifics whatever and, in particular,
devoid of any commitment by either party to proffer or to accept a
preferred body. Nevertheless, Subject felt quite certain that slots
would still be open if (6)19's mission and that a recommendation from
him would suffice to effect favorable action by (1019.
1. On 20 May I phoned Subject and (1019 on the topic of secretaries had
she had gone to school at the U. S., had worked here, and had done
a hitch as a social secretary for the Aimerican Ambassador in La Paz.) 08
Subject drew the obvious conclusions that it might be difficult to
dummy up AMBUNNY's bi-banesinuf adequately to prevent her from
being "discovered" by the Cubans. At any rate, since she was our
only candidate, Subject agreed to meet with her in New York so that
together they could thread out the pragmatics of the problem. The
meeting was set for 22 May. Al Marin (alias) would participate in this
meeting.
Agricrith
f./k
Glnv


14/00/00
SUNET
- 2 -
3. For the record, I should like to note that in the two and a
half years since I had last seen Subject he had aged over 15 years.
When I last saw him he was a round-need, dark-haired, boyish person
and has now been transformed into a very grey, very puffy, 50 year old
man though I understand his chronological age is something short of 40.
These observations had nothing to do with anything except they might
indicate that Subject is living under a situation. I derived the
impression, which coincides with that I obtained a first time I met
with Subject, that he is constitutionally oblique in his past to
matters. He is a very difficult person to corner. I am firmly
convinced that to date in this operation, if it may be called that, we have
never come close to placing Subject in the corner and that it is high time
we do so. I do not imply that he is a man of ill will, rather that
instinctively he is a man who slides off problems until such time as he
feels he has sufficient evidence or is in the right posture to solve them.
I should think it would be our task to exploit these natural capacities
while at the same time attempting to assure that Subjects not sliding
away from us.
Sidney P. Di Ubaldo


