104-10174-10038
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
DRAFT
2 February 196°
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORDS:
SUBJECT: Bérifiéng of Eafvard G. Tichbern(P)
1. Edward 0.Tichborn(P) arrived in Washington from his trip to Cuba during
the night of 31 January 1960/. He was debreifed at the Hotel Stater from about
1000 to 1530 hours on 1 February. Those present at the debriefing were Messrs.
03 (Phil Toomey) and Charles Penney from "P Division, M (alexandor Hunter) PF/ED, and
the Undersigned. This debriefing was very interesting and resulted inx a good
deal of pertinent information. The three and a half reels of tape derived from
cherefrom are now being transcribed by this office. Some of the more salient
points are noted below:
2. Some of the operational information and suggestions offered by Tichborn
are the following:
a. There appears to be little chance of a coalition of the opposition
groups at this time or in the near future since they are not well organised
and each group must would want to be the leader of such an effort. Also,
according to the main part of the group. The second is an talked, it is
the general means of opinion that Fidel Castro is in order for loosing
his own of the devotion of his followersa for some time to come.
b. Fidel Castro seems to become most xupset and almost panded by
defections. Possessing a "Massiah-type complex" he cannot bear the thought
of someone leaving the fold. Rather than to let such defections pass on
unnoticed, he feels cormpiled to give reasons and rake excuses. This then
blows he matter up perhaps out of proportion and quickly become a matter
of public knowledge. Tichborn feels that the inducement of defections could
be more than one effect on Castro than any other single, rational action we
might undertake.
c. There appears to be a relatively long-standing schism between the
brothers Fidel and Raoul Castro. Raoul is the mose cold individual. As an
example, Fidel once ordered some 400 prisoners to be returned safely to their
hoges, but Raoul had a number of them killed. The general feeling in Cuba is
not a very strong, very strong, and more than one of the most important
fellow-traveller. Developing or exploiting this schiss could therefore, be
operationally advantageous. (The fact that they are brothers would probably
have little effect on Fidel who has already reduced kixxank the land holdings
of his mother and another brother in conformity with the agrarian reforma
program and who jailed his sister, and fired a Minister, over a shake-down
on an inourance deal.)
3. Of special operational interest were several individuals Tichborn
mentioned who might have some influence on Fidel Castro and hence might be of
08
5 IPV


-2-
operational interest. They are:
a. Father(Padre) Alberto de Castro: he is a Jesuit priest presently
located in Caracas, Venezuela, who had been a teacher of Pidel Castro during
his youth. Castro was in Venezuela and saw Father de Castro there during
which time the latter criticized Fidel for some of his actions. In spite of
the fact that this premonstration occured in front of some of Fidel's men,
and they later reported treated him with great respect. It was felt by Fichhorn's source
chatted alone of this in the early 1930s. He was a teacher of the Castro unobcuted
for an hour. has some influence over Castro. Tichborn suggested that it would be of value to
determine whether or not Fidel has any regular contact with Father de Castro
and if so,what operational potential he might have.
b. "Barb'athews: he is a journalist with the H.Y.Times and was the only
American newspaperman covering the Castro story prior to his final success.
While Tichborn was in Cuba, a front page article par appeared in Revolucion
of the American Society, he was a teacher of the American Society. He
praised Mathews as a "real man" and one who understood the revolution and
its aims. Tichborn feels that it might be to our advantage to get into
contact with Mathews since he appears to have the confidence of the
administration.
2. Professor, Roseo: Subject is on the faculty of the Universidad de
Villas and the University of contemporary of Fidel Castro. They were ela-mates and
both were debators although according to Rosco, Castro did not make the
Debating Society of which he (Rosco) was the presidentOnce after the
revolution, Rosco attended a speech Castro made and after the oration, the
latter asked Rosco what he thought of it. Upon hearing some criticism, he wanted
to
be the most important role in the development of the American Society.
Venezuela and the United States he asked Rosco to accompany him in order that
they could discues the matter further. Tichborn feels that Rosco (a member of
the opposition) knew probably has more influence on Castro than Rosco realizes
and that this possibility would be worth looking into.
d. Edward R.Marrow: he produced a TV program on Castro and Tichborn feels
that he might have established a rapport with Castro during this period.
4. One of the contacts Tichborn made in Cuba (the Director of Tourism) asked
him if he knew of anyone who would be interested in coming to Ouba on an all-expenses-
paid visit in order to write articles (or other similar propaganda) on present day
Ouba. Tichborn mentioned Glete Roberts, a popular radio and TV commentator in Los
Angeles as a possible candidate. (Tichborn also discussed this matter with Horace
H. Davis.) Tichborn will mention this possibility to Roberts upon his return to
California.
5. While in Cuba, Tichborn accidently met a young lady who later revealed to
him that she was "an agent for the @State Department". He felt that this was a
security matter and that it should be brought to our attention for that purpose.
Mr (Tomey) did not recognize the name; it is being further checked out with WH
Division. The incident and the details will be made the subject of a separate
memorandum for CI Staff.
'IPJ


140000
6. On the administrative side, 6%. Tichber will forward by explain his
financial accounting, one copy to the cover company and the other to Henry
M. Darkin(7). The cover letter which was provided him the the event that
he came to the attention of the Quban authorities was returned to us and is
now in his file. (There was no necessity for its use.) Tichborn inquired as to
the possibility of receiving reimbursement for medical expenses which will
undoubtedly be incurred upon his return to California due to a possible hernia
which developed in New York on his return trip an route to Washington. This is
being checked out by this office. Tichborn departed for Los Angeles (having been
taken to Freudahip international Airport by "Sauy-Hobrin) at about 1800
hours on 1 February 1960.
Evelena S. Vidal


