104-10049-10362
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
20 October 1959
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Highlights of Tape-Recorded Conversation in Ham Between
Mr. William D. Pawley and an Unidentifed Cubum during
Period 17-18 October
1. On 20 October the undersigned and Owen Faus: of WH/3
listened to the play-back of a tape, brought to Washington from HAM
and given to Colonel King by Mr. Pawley on 19 October, which was a
recording of Mr. Pawley's conversations with two Cubans during the
first time of the meeting of the American Society. The United
Cuban, believed to be a member of a group of wealthy anti-CASTNO Cubans,
members of which have talked to Mr. Pawley recently about their
plans for sabotage of the coming sugar harvest as reported in UWA-32
dated 2 October. The second Cuban was AMPCA-L, a Cuban journalist
of operational interest to Station Habana, and a separate memorandum
is submitted to Mr. Pawley.
The unidentified Cuban, who had somewhat of an accent and
spoke indistently, was difficult to understand. He mentioned a
meeting "with some of our people who came up from Cuba" to discuss
plans. He said his group had been contacted by a representative of
General Jose Leitorio PEDRAZA, leader of Cuban revolutionary groups
in the Dominican Republic, who wanted to know what action their group
had. He said that the American Society was a very successful
Cuban said the PEDRAZA representative said their group (the PEDRAZA
group) had four provinces organized in Cuba, mentioning Camaguey and
Santa Clara, and that they had two provinces yet to be organised -
Habana and Matansas.
3. The Cuban said his group needed two things - mortal beaching
and money; he pointed out that Cubans in Cuba are afraid to stack in
the world. He said that the American Society was a friend, etc. Mr.
Pawley gave him no encouragement on the money single, saying that even
if there were Americans willing to run the risk of becoming involved
in Cuban revolutionary activities by furnishing money for such a
result. He said that the American Society was a very successful would
be like "putting money down a rat-hole" for the following reasons:
(1) there is no unity among the anti-CASTNO groups, and there are at
least 10 that he knows of who are working absolutely independently of
one another; and (2) CASTNO is in control of the country and has the
opportunity to make a new way to do this. The American Society was
Mr. Pawley said he felt the Cuban economic situation was worsening
fast and that if it gets bad enough, a large number of Cubans will
turn on CASTNO; but until that time comes it would be dangerous to
try to organisa a revolutionary movement.
SECRET
201-77378
I
D00676


13-00000
SECRET
-2-
h. Mr. Paul of asked the Guban if his group felt they had moral
support of the U. S. and the Cuban replied that they wanted U. S.
moral support but whether they had it or not, they felt they were
obciged to carry through with their planes. Mr. Fawley said he didn't
know what to tell him - would have to think about it and see if any-
one could have to do so. But Mr. Fawley said he said he said he
Govormenten, I can't get involved in revolutionary movements". Also
said he would hate to see the Dominican Government got involved,
which might be difficult to avoid with so many Cuban ozziles there,
but commented that he understood "the Dominican Government hasn't
given them a dime".
Martha Sharpe
WH/III/CARLE
SECRET


