104-10179-10232
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
6 November 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, Special Affairs Gait
SUBJECT
: AMWORLD--Project JNHART
1. Chief, WH/T has tentatively offered the services of CIA
contract personnel assigned to this project-principally those of the
Director of the Panamerican Foundation, Mr. Curtis Wugu- to serve
as a channel to ex-Iresident Figuere and Foreign Minister Cudber
in promoting the acceptability of AMWORLD and AMBIDDY-1 by the
moderate left. Under the terms of the INHART Project, CIA, through
Cunita Wugu will be able to influence the composition of the student
bedy of the School for Inter-American Development. It is proposed that
Wugu would tell Figuere and Cudber that it is intended to also enroll
Cubane in the (school)and that in the area of the Cudber, Cudbery should be
referred to as a "social" program. It is now to be designed to
principles, such as Artime's MRR, Manolo Kay'e JURE, the MAP
and MDC. It is unlikely that Figures and Cudber would demur. In
any case, their demurrels could be overruled. The prominent mention
of the MRR as a cradle of democratic ideas and the actual inclusion of
students selected by Artime would postulate acceptance of the MIR and
of Artime as exponents of a political philosophy acceptable to the mode-
rate left. Any excertation of Artime for having allied himself with the
Sopence would be blunted if the MRR forms a part of the student body
(2nd cocially the faculty) of the School of Intor-American Development
2. I intend to suggest to Artime that he pay his respecta to
Figuerea in Cambridge, of course without alluding to the school project.
The purpose of the call would, quite (rankly, be to butter up Figueree.
SECRET
:


14/00/00
SECRET
- 2 -
All the information I have been able to gather suggests that the combi-
ation of Memon Harin/figuere, as far as Washington is concerned,
is unbestable and that Artime has little choice but to alin himself with
their way of looking at thinge--or least to pay lip service to it.
3. Another angle I would like to explore is President Betancourt.
The more I read of his accomplishments as president, tae more im-
pressed I am. V. hat would you think of having Artime, arned with a
letter of introduction from Figuere, pay Betancourt a call before he
relinguise the presidency. Artime's approach would not be that of a
supplicant or solicitor of support, but that of a young man making a
pigtrimage, sitting at the feet of a revolutionary who has been successful,
and the right to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to
be is out from under the daily grind of government, to address himself
to the problems of post-Castro Cuba. He could invite him to chair a
seminar attended by the MRR leadership. The objective would, of course,
be to involve Betancourt in the affairs of the MRR, without setting his
name on the masthead and without asking him to contribute anything but
reflections of his lustre as a Latin American leader who bequeathed his
society, and the most important democratic regime. Undoubtedly Artime
will have to cast off ideologie, consistent in order to accommodate his
reluctant aponsor (tigheres, Betancourt), but Havana "vent him use
messe." As a minimum objective, Artime would in any case have to
strive to neutralise the latent animotism of the moderate left, denying
Manolo Ray an unchallenged ascendancy and monopolizing the support,
which he can probably get for the asking.
4. A welcome by-product of the resuscitation of JNAART,
is "Combate," an influential periodical with strong readership appeal
in Latin America among elements of the moderate left, edited by
Monjer. A German national named Ur. Erich Hersog who is a member
of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) has been lecturing
in San Jose on an "Ideological Inquiry into Comrundism, "He program,
indirectly sponsored by the Federal Republic, (all be absorbed by
JNAART. the wolds considerable influence in molding the thinking of
Central America's left of center leadership. The First Secretary of
the Irarell Embassy in Guatemala has also been mentioned as a Influential
among the intellectual elite. A Fuerio Rican named Santiago Pollante
SECRET
"


(Frecedent of the Assembly) le Munes Karia's man in openssoring
JUMHART, and is quoted as having referred to Figuerea 88 the guiding
light, overshadowing all others.
cc: WH/7
SAS/50/58
SAS/50/AR
DC/SAS/MOB
SECRET
- 3 -
:
1911
Rerry D. Hackeber
SAS/50
CIT
CIT
SECREI


