104-10171-10047
2025 RELEASE NDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
2P
DISPATCH
CLASSIFICATION
PROCESSING
S E C R E T
TOW
ATMAN
RISSED
MILD
MILD
TO
Aoting: Chief, WS
NO NCTING RESUED
MFGL
ONI 304477
Chief, Sam Force 7
CANCY 021717
TRO
CANCY 021717
Chief of Station, Madrid
ABSTRACT
SUBJECT
OZ
SUBJECT
DISTRIBUTION
Business Activity in Cuba
ACTION REQUIRED
ACTION: FYI
The following information was provided by Franiscoo Luis Rodrigues
Conzales (CC-1169), a Cuban refugee who arrived in Spain in early August
1962 and had been active in the Revolutionary Student Directors, an
anti-Government resistance group, while in Cuba.
a. Source has been opposed to the Castro regime over since the detection of
Dias Lenz in May 1959, and was involved in sabotage activity with the
Diana Lenz in May 1959, and was involved in a service of a service having
06
Pontianils known as "Charles" in olandestine cirlos. Alberto Müller,
the loaded of this group, arrived clandestinely in Cuba in Gotobor or
November 1960 and began to organize the various groups of Directors to
be the most important role in the American War. The American War. the
Those groups were mainly from the provilicol of Las Villas and Avanna, and
received orders to unite with Muller who was already in the Siegra Naestrn.
The man went there in small groups, and had the seminary in the Santuario
and the American War. The American War. the American War. the American
instructions and military equipment. Surore's group, which consisted of two
carloads, entered the Sierra Maestra through Bayamo. Source was riding in
the first car. When they arrived on the outskirts of Bayamo, source's car
dinner, the American War. the American War. the American War. the
oheok. A few minutes later they renlized that they were being: followed and
tried to ocoapo. An alara and shots went up, and they were finally captured
and taken prisoner. The second car, which was following close behind them
and was warned by the shocts, was able to escape.
b. The prisoner were taken first to G-2 Handquarters in Santiago de Cuba and
later to the Boniato Prison, where they were interrogated by the G-2.
There were two American prisoners there, and although source did not know
their names, he maid that they were from the Guantanamo-Hesval Sase.
o. Buller was taken prisoner a few days later (shortly after the ill-fated
invasion of Flaya Grion). No arms were taken from him when he was arrested.
Had this insurrection been mccossful, about 1,000 men would have risen up.
19-120-19
DIA FRYCE
DATE DISTRICTED
31 August 62
31 August 62
10000
CROSS RESIDENCE
DEPARTMENT SURVEYOR AND NUMBER
OSILA-14,272
MEAGUARITURS THE MUNICAR
CLASSIFICATION
23 62-33/4
D 19-9-9
S E C R E T
23
315R


CLASSIFICATION
DISTRIBUTION
CLASSIFICATION
DISTRIBUTION
DISPATCH
DISPATCH
14,272
d. Of the Lullor group, which was called the "127" about 60 prisoners were
taken, five of whom, including source, were set free. One of these was
an infiltrator called Flore, whom no one trusted since they knew that
he was not "one of the group." Another of these was Rolando Valdez
D'Wolf who is now in prison in the Fortaleza de la Cabista serving a nine-
year-old woman, who had been in prison. He was a very good man who
militiaman and wearing a militia uniform. He defended himself bravely, but
received five bullet wounds which inacapitated him. The other two who
were released were Eduardo Dias Lanz and Jorge Cruz España, a sergeant in
the area of the group. He was a very good man who was a very good man
not been involved in the group. Source thought that he (source) and Elas
Lans were released so that they might be followed and lead the Government
to other groups and individuale in Havana who might be involved in
resistance activity. Source had been in prison six months before being
released and one thing which he could not explain was that on the pages
of the group. He was with indicated his release, no mention was made of any
sentence or penalty.
e. On several occasions, Muller had been subjected to false execution
procedures, with the purpose of trying to make him talk, but he did not
weaken. During the trial, "everyone remained firm," and source was told
that Muller was very brave in his pronouncements against the Fegime and,
at every moment, abided by his principles. He presented a very brilliant
case.
f. When source was in the Boniato prison, he shared a cell with a Captain
Anibal Rodrigues, who belonged to the MNR. This officer, along with other
rebol officers and soldiers, had staged an uprising in Linés, in Oriente
Province. Later he was sentenced to deati and shot.
g. During his last days in Cuba, nource avoided all revolutionary activity,
since he wanted to leave Cuba more than anything else. However he knew
that the various resistance groups worked hard, carrying out a great deal
of the work. He was a very good man who had a large number of
among the various movements. One movement which had a large membership
especially in Orienta Province, was the L-30-II. This group was planning to
launch an insurrection in Pinar del Río in January 1962, but they could
not carry it out since the repression in the area was so great.
h. Hans, a member of the Revolutionary Student Directorate, was recently
taken prisoner, and it seemed that he was tortured a great deal and
talked. As a result of this, a house in Wajay, in Havana Province, was
asked and arm and palatina were found. The owners of the house and other
persons were arrested.
Nolan B. Capolla
Helen B. Capolla
Attachments: Spanish report - 1
PC76
Distributions
2 - AC/MC, w/att.
2 - C/TDE
1


