104-10122-10141
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SUBJECT: Robert A. Mahou
Mr. Robert A. Mahou was born on 30 October 1917 in
Waterville, Maine. He graduated from Holy Cross College in 1940
and is married with four children. He was employed as a
Special Agent with the FBI from 1940 to 1947, and upon re-
signing from the Bureau, formed a private enterprise doing
business as "Dairy Dream Products." This venture culminated
in bankruptcy in 1952. He then re-entered Government service
with the Small Business Administration in Washington, D. C.
and was appointed Special Assistant to the Administrator with
the specific duty of Director of Security. In February of
1954, he was forced to resign from SBA because of political
reasons, determined to be the result of backing the wrong
political party in the election. He then set up his own
investigative organization known as Robert A. Mahou Associates.
Mr. Mahou was recruited by the Office of Security in
March of 1954. He was previously known to Mr. Robert H.
Cunningham (deceased) who was, at that time, Chief, Special
Security Division, through their mutual employment by the
FBI. Cunningham say in Mahou a covert asset who could be
utilized by the Office in extremely sensitive cases. With
the approval of the Director of Security, Subject was offered
a proposition wherein he was to receive $500.00 per month,
with the stipulation that he move into his own office and
that he on call for any assignments by the Office of
Security. He agreed to this and immediately took steps to
move out of his area, where he rented desk space in a suite
occupied by Carmine S. Bellino, a former PBI agent and CPA.
In July of 1954, Mahou was engaged by "British shipping
interests" to check on Aristotle Onassis' activities while
in the United States. This included technical coverage of
Onassis' New York office. It was later learned that the
principal "British interest" was Stavros Niarchus and that
the ultimate goal of this task was to scrap the Onassis/
Saudi oil deal. Maheu took the job but conditioned his
acceptance with the fact that he would do nothing inimical
to the U. S. Government. Any information developed of interest
to the United States was to be passed by Maheu to the appro-
priate Government agency.


During this operation Maheu had his staff prepare a
paper citing dangers to U. S. economy and trade resulting
from the Onassis deal. Through contacts in FOA, Maheu
had Harold Stassen read this paper in the National Security
Council on 22 June 1954. During this same period Maheu
briefed Scott McLeod, Assistant Secretary of State for
Security and Consular Affairs on the project. McLeod
agreed to furnish State commo and pouch facilities subject
to John Foster Dulles' approval. Additionally, Maheu
briefed J. Edgar Hoover and Vice President Nixon.
In August of 1954, Maheu advised this Office of his rela-
tionship with Niarchus. NEA Division was contacted and
expressed interest in this matter. They were put in touch
with Maheu and furnished him a comno channel, a pouch system
and operational guidance. International litigation erupted
as a result of the Onassis/Niarchus matter, and as a result
of Niarchus claiming Government privilege in the case, the
Agency was subsequently identified as being the Government
agency involved. Files of this Office reflect extensive
correspondence furnished us by the Office of General Counsel
in 1956 regarding the Onassis matter.
On 16 August 1954 Subject was granted a covert security
clearance for utilization as an agent under Project TWIXT
in the Near East. On 30 August 1954 he was granted a similar
clearance to permit his use in the United States as a covert
associate under Project LPHIDDEN. In November of 1957, a
cable from Ciudad Trujillo indicated that Mr. Maheu had
allegedly been involved in a violation of the Mann Act in
procuring and transporting prostitutes for President Sukarno
during Sukarno's state visit to the United States in 1956.
Nr. Maheu contacted this Office to advise that the allegations
were without foundation and stated that he would take steps
immediately to have his attorney see that appropriate
Dominican officials would retract the charges. This was
subsequently done. Edward Bennett Williams acted as Maheu's
lawyer in this matter.
In 1957 information was received indicating that during
President Sukarno's visit to Moscow in the fall of 1956, he was
introduced to a Soviet woman within the Kremlin. He had
an affair with her against the admonitions of his advisers.
It was reported that the Soviets took detailed films of the
affair and that a copy was sent to the PKI. In June of 1957
Al Ulmer and Samuel Halpern, FE Division, contacted the
2


140000
Director of Security and outlined a project wherein they
envisioned a film being made simulating this affair. It
was planned that clips from this film would be inserted in
a leaflet for distribution throughout Southeast Asia sug-
gesting that Sukarno was compromised by the Soviets. In
July of 1957, Robert Maheu was given this assignment. He
utilized a trusted male employee of this organization (since
deceased) and his fiance. Maheu after an intensive make-up
course, administered the make-up to the participants himself,
utilizing available pictures and descriptions of the subjects
as a guide. He hired a studio where he was given detailed
instruction on the use of the lights and camera. When the
film was taken, only Maheu and the two participants were in
the studio. The project known as "Happy Days, was never
coapleted and the film was not distributed.
Files of this Office reflect that during the 1958-1959
period, FE Division was put in touch with Maheu by this
Office for assistance in another operation relating to
President Sukarno. This project was originated in May 1958
when FE Division initially contacted the Director of Security
and briefed him on the project known as MARPSTAR. Basically,
the project capitalized on President Sukarno's known weakness
for Caucasian women. Robert Maheu was given the assignment
to locate a female-candidate. He advised that a prominent
attorney and "man about town,
could
come up with a qualified woman.
was investigated with
favorable results and given a CSA on 2 July 1968 but was not
made writing of CIA interest. The female candidate was
a well-to-do widow, approximately
35 years of age, resident of
considered to be
highly intelligent and extremely attractive: In August of
1958, the Project HARPSTAR plan was concurred in by the COPS
and the DCI.
In September of 1958, Maheu and James O'Connell, of this
Office, met with
in New York City.
was
briefed on Agency interest in the matter. Later in September
Maheu met with
in New York City under his true
name and told her of governmental interest.
knew
Heheu's true identity having been introduced to hin socially
by
On the same day (23 September 1958),
was introduced to Joseph Smith, FE Division (known to both
and Maheu as Joseph Sims) was briefed on the
assignment, indicated that she understood exactly what was
3


expected of her and stated that she could leave the country
in 45 days. On 24 September 1958 "Sins" again met with
at which time she was told she would be accompanied by
a female traveling companion, Elizabeth Hoargath (actually
Elizabeth Harter, FE Division). was told that "Jogarth"
would ostensibly be her secretary but would be, in fact,
the person she would look to for direction.
Records of this Office do not reflect any of the
activities of during the course of her mission. It
is known that she did meet Sukarno, but due to unfortunate
timing that had him leaving his country on official business,
she had little time to cultivate him. Consequently, the
purpose of the mission was not fulfilled. The last known
contact
had with the Agency was in the form of a tele-
phone call on 12 April 1961 wher She called on a sterile line
and talked to Mr. Hugh Tovar, who she knew as George Henry.
She advised that one had asked her to give a
party for President Sukarno who would be in Los Angeles on
21 April 1961. wanted to know whether the Agency was
interested in sponsoring this party. A negative response
was given.
In June of 1959, a covert security approval was issued
for the use of Mheau by 10 Division in order for hin to be
approached and advised of Agency interest in International
Labor. Files of this Office do not reflect whether or not
this was done. On 7 October 1959 a covert security approval
was granted for Mr. Mabeu's use in the United States. The
request for approval indicated that Subject might be employed
by the King of Jordan to handle Jordanian public relations in
the United States. Mr. Mabeu's later involvement in the pro-
curement of feminine companionship for King Hussein during
the latter's state visit to the United States is.set forth
in Attachment A.
In August of 1969, Richard M. Bissell, the then Dp/P
contacted the Director of Security regarding the Roselli
matter. Details concerning this are set forth in Attachment B.
In 1966 information was received by the Agency indicating
that the Senate Administrative Practices Subcommittee, under
the chairmanship of Senator Edward V. Long, had advised Maha
that his testimony was dosired concerning his relationship
with Onassis, Savros Niarchos, Sam Giancana and
The Subcommittee interest was invasion of privacy and
4


particularly the use of audio devices by private investigators.
In July of 1966, Senator Long was alerted to the fact that
the Agency had had sensitive operational contacts with Maheu.
Senator Long was told that the Agency had used Maheu over
the years on a number of occasions but that he had never
been asked to engage in any wiretapping and had never
engaged in any such activities on our behalf. Office of
Security files do not indicate whether or not Maheu did
appear before this Subcommittee, although it appears that
he did not.
In January of 1971, in light of the involvement of
Maheu in a suit between executives of the Hughes Company
and Maheu, the Director of Security recommended to the DCI
that all existing clearances with Maheu and Associates be
terminated. The DCI concurred in this recommendation.
Files of this Office reflect that Subject's company,
Maheu and Associates, cooperated with the Agency in supporting
the activities of an LPGLOBE agent, Michael G. Merhige,
in Ecuador.
A memorandum from the Chief, Central Cover Staff to
the Inspector General dated 10 October 1973, delineates the
relationship between CCS and Robert Maheu and Associates.
Information regarding the possibility that Subject was
involved in a leak of information concerning a sensitive
DD/SBT Special Projects Staff project is set forth in
Attachment C.
Subject's son Peter Robert Maheu was a staff employee
of the Agency and of this Office from 1963 to 1964. No was
a clerical employee. In February of 1969, Peter Maheu
was granted a covert security approval as an employee of
Maheu and Associates for use on Project QRENCHANT.
140000
Source


140000
SUBJECT: Robert Maheu - King Hussein Incident
1. In connection with the official State visit of
King Fussein from 16 March through 18 April 1959, the
Office of Security was requested to render special support
during the Los Angeles and New York phases of the tour.
According to NEA personnel Messrs. Norman Paul, Fred LaTash
and William Aras, King Hussein was especially desirous of
female companionship during his Los Angeles visit) and it
was requested that appropriate arrangements be made through
a controlled source of the Office in order to assure a
satisfied visit.
2. On 3 April 1959 Mr. Robert Maheu, a cleared Office
of Security contact, was asked to arrange a party for King
Hussein at Los Angeles, California. This was done by
Mr. Maheu through Mr.
Mr.
is a
prominent attorney and
figure pre-
viously granted a covert security approval for use by FE
Division. By pre-arrangement, during the course of this
party King Hussein was introduced to
a part-
tine screen and stage actress. For the duration of King
Hussein's stay in Los Angeles, (3 through 7 April 1959, he
and Miss became intimate friends. It was indicated
by Mr. LaTash, who was integrated into the State party,
that King Hussein desired to continue his friendship with
Miss and that he wished to meet with her during his
stay in New York City from 14 through 18 April 1959.
3. On 13 April 1959. arrangements were made to rent the
home of
an Office of Security source,
at Long Beach, Long Island, for the period 14 through 18
April 1959. The home was to be used as a confidential meetings
place for Miss and King Hussain. At the same time
Miss was registered at the Hotel Barclay, Ill East
48th Street, New York City; under the name of Mrs.
of Hi Paso, Texas. The publicity touching on the
relationship had become more pointed since (some publicity
mention had been made of the background of Miss
On 14 April 1959 Mr. LaTresh. and Miss were transported
to the home on Long Island which was taken over as


the neeting place for King hussein and Miss
Later
the same day, by pre-arrangement, two Department of State
Security Agents, a New York City police lieutenant and a
hired chauffeur arrived with King Hussein. Miss
remained at the site through 18 April 1959, and King Mussein
and his party visited each evening and remained for about
four to five hours.
4. During the stay at the Long Beach site, Miss
discussed the publicity in the case at some length with the
Security representatives. She speculated about the possible
sources of certain personal information that she felt had
been leaked to the press. Additionally she spoke of her
deep feeling for King Hussein and commented on how
initially sought her out to serve as a party com-
panion for the King. At the time she said she was unclear
as to just what part Mr.
wanted her to play. In
attempting to clarify his case Mr.
said, "I am
employed by the CIA: We want you to go to bed with hin."
Miss
said she rejected the proposal but finally went
to the party. She became quite taken with King Hussein and
found him to be most charming.
5. All personal contacts by Security representatives
in this case were under arias and implied State Department
affiliation. There is no record or indication in any of the
files in this case that involves Robert, Mheu by name of
reference. It is believed that Mr. Mheu was never intro-
duced to Miss and as far as can be determined
"fronted" for all arrangements. Office of Security
investigation conducted variously from 25 May through
17 September 1959 of
reflected no substantive
derogatory information regarding her.
2


140000
SUBJECT: The Johnny Roselli Matter
1. In August of 1960 Mr. Richard Bissell approached
the then Director of Security, Colonel Sheffield Edwards,
to determine if the Office of Security had any assets that
might assist in a sensitive mission requiring gangster-type
action. The mission target was Fidel Castro. Because of
its extreme sensitivity, only a small group was knowledgeable
of the project. The DCI was briefed and gave his approval.
Colonel J. C. King, Chief, WH Division, was briefed, but all
details were concealed from any of the JRMAVE officials.
Certain TSD and Communications personnel participated in
the initial planning stages but were not witting of the
purpose of the mission.
2. Robert Maheu was contacted, briefed generally on
the project, and requested to ascertain if he could develop
an entree into gangster elements. Mr. Maheu advised that he
had met one Johnny Roselli on several occasions while visiting
Las Vegas. Maheu knew Roselli only casually through clients
but had been given to understand that Roselli.was a high
ranking member of the "Syndicate" and controlled all of the
ice making machines on the Strip. Maheu was asked to
approach Roselli, who knew Maheu as a personal relations
executive handling domestic and foreign accounts. Maheu
was to tell Roselli that he had recently been obtained by a cli-
ent who represented several international business firms which
were suffering heavy financial losses in Cuba as a result of
Castro's action. These firms were convinced that Castro's
removal was the answer to the problems and were willing to
pay a price of $150,000 for its successful accomplishment.
It was to be made clear to Roselli that the United States
Government was not and should not become aware of this
operation.
3. The pitch was made to Roselli on 14 September 1960
at the Hilton Plaza Hotel, New York City. Mr. James O'Connell,
Office of Security, was present during this meeting and was
identified to Roselli as an employee of Maheu. O'Connell
actively served as Roselli's contact until May 1962 at which
time he phased out due to an overseas assignment. Roselli's


initial reaction was to avoid getting involved, but through
Maheu's persuasion he agreed to introduce him to a friend,
Sam Gold. Roselli made it clear that he would not want
any money for his part, and he believed that Gold would
feel the same way. Neither of these individuals were ever paid
out of Agency funds.
4. During the week of 25 September 1960, Maha' was
introduced to Gold at the Fontainebleau Hotel, Miami Beach.
During this meeting Maha' also met an individual identified
as "Joe" who was supposedly a courier operating between
Havena and Miami. Several weeks later Maha' saw photographs
of both of these individuals in the Sunday Supplemental
Parade. They were identified as Momo Salvatore Giancana
and Santos Trafficant. Both were on the list of the
Attorney General's ten most wanted men. Giancana was
described as the Chicago Chieftan of the Cosa Nostra and
successor to Al Capone. Trafficant was identified as the
Cosa Nostra boss of Cuban operations. Maha' called this
Office immediately upon ascertaining this information.
5. In discussing the possible methods of accomplishing
the mission, Sam suggested that thay not resort to firearms
but that he be. furnished some type of potent pill that could
be placed in Castro's food or drink. Gold indicated that
he had a prospective nominee in the person of Juan Orta, a
Cuban official who had been receiving kickback payments for
a gambling interest and who still had access to Castro and
was still in a financial bind.
6. TSD was requested to produce six pills of high
lethal content which were then delivered to Orta by "Joe."
After several weeks of reported atrepts, Orta apparently
got cold feet and asked out of the assignment. He suggested
another candidate who made several attempts without success.
"Joe" then indicated that Dr. Anthony Verona, ons of the
principal officers in the Cuban exile junta, had become
disaffected with the apparent ineffectual progress of the
junta and was willing to handle the mission through his
own resources. Verona asked that he be given $10,000 for
organization expenses and requested $1,000 worth of communi-
cations equipment. Dr. Verona's potential was never fully
exploited as the mission was cancelled shortly after the
Bay of Pigs episode. Verona was advised the offer was
withdrawn, and the pills were retrieved. At the hight of
2


140000
the project negotiations, Gold expressed concern about
who he learned WAS
.
Gold asked Maheu to put a bug in
roon to determine the extent of
with
The technician involved in the assignment
was discovered in the process, arrested, and taken to the
sheriff's office for questioning. He called Maheu in the
presence of sheriff's personnel and informed him that he
had been detained. Subsequently, the Department of Justite
announced its intention to prosecute Maheu along with the
technician. Un 7 February 1962 the Director of Security
briefed the then Attorney General Robert Kennedy on the circum-
stances leading up to Maheu's involvement in the wiretap. At
our request, prosecution was dropped.
7. In May 1962 Mr. William Harvey took over as Roselli's
case officer and it is not known if he was used officially
from that point on. It was subsequently learned from the
FBI that Roselli had been convicted on six counts involving
illegal entry into the United States some time during
November 1967. On 2 December 1963 Roselli along with four
other individuals was convicted of conspiracy to cheat
members of the Friar's Club of $400,000 in a rigged gin
rumay gane. Mr. Harvey reported his contacts with Roselli
to this office during November and December of 1967 and
January of 1963. Roselli was facing deportation at that
time but felt that he would win an appeal.
8. On 17 November 1970 Mr. Maheu called James O'Connell,
Roselli's first case officer, to advise that Maheu's attorney,
Ed Morgan had received a call from Thomas Waddin, Roselli's
attorney, who stated that all avenues of appeal had been ex-
hausted and Roselli faced deportation: Waddin indicated that
if someone did not intercede on Roselli's behalf, he would
make a complete expose of his activity with the Agency. On
13 November 1970 Mr. Helms was briefed on this latest develop-
ment and it was decided that the Agency would not in any way
assist Roselli. Maheu was advised of the Agency's position
and was in complete agreement. He stated that he was not
concerned about any publicity as it affected him personally
Should Roselli decide to tell all. Subsequently Roselli or
someone on his behalf furnished Jack Anderson details of the
operation. Anderson wrote two columns regarding this operation
3


on 13 January 1971 and 23 February 1971. Roselli was last
known to be in the Federal Penitentiary in Seattle,
Washington.
4


140000
SUBJECT: Special Projects Staff Matter
1. On 25 June 1974 Mr. Paul Evans, Security Officer,
Special Projects Staff, DD/S$T, requested that Office of
Security records be checked regarding a Mr. James R. Phelan
and Mr. Wallace Turner who were both of interest in connection
with a sensitive SPS activity.
2. A check of FBI and Office of Security records
indicated that Mr. Phelan had written an unfavorable
article about the FBI in 1965 which appeared in the Saturday
Evening Post. Additionally Mr. Phelan testified as a defense
witness in the Clay Shaw conspiracy trial on 26 February 1969.
A review of Agency library sources reflected that Mr. Phelan
had published a number of articles. Mr. Carl Duckett, DD/S$T,
has speculated that Mr. Robert Maheu might have been the
source of Mr. Phelan's information. Several DD/S$T officers
recalled that in approximately December of 1970. Mr. James
O'Connell received a telephone call from Mr. Maheu in which
Mr. Maheu complained that the Agency had embarked on a new
project with the Howard Hughes organization and had not
gone through him. A review of various articles by Mr. Phelan
indicated that he had written several stories concerning
Maheu's defamation suit against Howard Hughes. In these
articles Phelan reported variously that: Howard Hughes
night have paid Robert Mahen $520,000 a year because of
Maheu's Central Intelligence Agency expertise; Maheu
reportedly claimed that one of his assignments for Hughes
was to get the CIA to serve as a cover for the billionaire's
activities, a request which Maheu says he refused to carry
out; and Maheu claimed that Howard Hughes suggested that
Maheu work out an arrangement whereby he or his organization
could become a front for the CIA, another suggestion which
Mahen claims he did not undertake.


