104-10165-10004
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
DE
On Friday, 19 June, departed Viail for Kineston. Jessica via
Pan American. leavise Viail at 0-600 and arriving lireston via Yontero Bay
at 10:15 U. This flight continues to on to Sam Jana. Puerto Rico. and latin
passuevers are commonplace. In passiz through imatization add custons. it
is necessary to give the immigration iuspector the name of a specific botel
r address at which you can be reached in Jamaica.
Obtained rental car from iertz Car Rental and departed Língstond
Airport at 10:45 U via Jia Highway A-1 for Fort Antonio of the U. North Coast. Rich-
way A-1 follows the coast around the eastern tip of the island. There is an other
route to Fort Antonio. of the U. North Coast. The U. North Coast amended. is shown
to be a major part of the region of the island. there is a small vote about seven
miles east of Port Antonio designated as "Blue Hole". The core is roughly
200 feet wide by 500 feet long. and completely protected from the open sea
and weather. The vote is extremely deep. and is reported to have a sininum
depth of six feet at the entrance. Iidal range appears to be very small, per-
haps one to two.
When I arrived at Blue Hole. which is about 2-1/2 hours br
road from Kingston. Robin Moore was not available: I went into Port Antonio
and secured a room at the Bonnie Live Hotel. I returned to Blue Hole about
five o'clock and there met Robin Moore. Mr. Moore owns most of the
surrounding Blue Hole. with the Jia House. The House of the House of the Balance. On
the morning, the House was built and operates a bar-restaurant which
he calls the Teahouse of the Blue Lazon. Tix accounts for the couvision
between Blue Hole and Blue Lazon. Gu the side of the mountain descceding to
the water, Moore has built and lives in a small studio apartment. He also
owns another small house overlooking Blue Hole. This "ouse was occupied tem-
erarily by a girl who was introduced to me at his fiancee. Marrot Falmer.
her mother, Rita Palmer. They are supposed to return to their home in November,
BCC. about the time.
About five o'clock I introduced myself to Moore as a friend of
Antonio de la Carrera, and gaze him the pore with the recognition symbol. We
talked from five o'clock until about 1:30 at which time are bad dinner and
parted until the next morning at 11:30.
I spent the night at the Bonnie Live Hotel and noted in passing
that a U., destroyer escort based at Guanassao Bay was anchored in the
harbor for the weekend, with the sea of the prison liberty in Port Antonio
This seems to be a common occurrence and could perhaps be a source of inform-
tion about Columbia. The area was along the south coast.
Saturday morning, 20 June. met Moore again. and continued our
discussion of the previous day. Durig our conversation. he introduced me to
Fred Barrett. a native Jamaican (colored). who is in charge of the operation
of the bar-restaurant. I left Mr. Moore and Blue Hole about 2:00 o'clock and
drove to kingston, catching the 6:30 Ten American flight back to Miezi. via
Montego Bay.
Following my two serious conversations with Moore. plus my
observations of the sun himself. plus my recomassance of the site itself.
I
subzit the following items of information as being of significance:
RETURN TO CA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduc


140000
1. Hobin Moore
a. Moore has just returned from Viet New where he partici-
pated in the combat operations of the American Special Forces is Viet Nau. after
he had gone through about eight months of training at the Special Forces School
at Fort Campbell, Kentucky. Sure understanding of Noore's personality may be
contained from reading an interview between his and the mazazine C. Kows and
Ford Report. which was published in the 1980s. The National News Left with
Maria. Further understanding and impressions of Moore may be paired from
reading his previously published book about Jack Youngblood. an American who
participated in the final leading to Castro's overthrow of Battista
b. In my opinion. Moore has a burning desire to be known
as a tough, two-fisted. rip roaring soldier of fortune. He has participated
in real war in Viet Nau. and has received what is probably the best training
in the world for guerilla fighters. umely, the C. S. Special Forces. This
is a very good way to be the most important and most important
inclined to inteperate use of alcohol and women. and his judgement of in-
portant matters is probably immature. However. he definitely understands
and is experienced in guerilla fighting, is experienced in military operations,
and trust surely understand military security.
c. He is definitely willing to help, but cannot contribute
cash directly; is willing to furnish the use of the guest house on his property
for limited periods of time. Is willing to participate and aid in an operation
to land people on the south coast of (uba, but is not willing to commit the un
of his property and facilities as a staging area for resupply in the future.
d. Is willing to come to Miami, for coufferences if his
expenses are paid.
2. Site Evaluation
a. Blue Hole is an excellent bartor: protected against
all weather, and with six feet of water at the bar. Ta surrounded by very
steep slopes, heavily wooded. Dock facilities are presently very eager,
but could be quickly and easily improved. No feel for a boat is available
to the庙. But and at Fort Antonio (the closest source), the fuel available
is diesel. or autoconfuse gasoline; no marine white gasoline is available
anywhere is the area. This is a most significant factor in selective a
suitable boat.
b. The nearest source of food and other supplies is Port
Autonio; Fred Barrett. manager of the Blue Lazon Club. orders and hails
supplies from Port Autocio constantly, and could deliver whatever supplies
were desired. Firearms and explosives are not obtainable on the island.
They would have to be smuggled in illegally.
c. A small station wagon is available for transportation,
provided expenses are paid by users.
3. Miscellaneous. Information
a. A local man. George Kunroe. is reported to be a very
experienced small boat captain and one who has brought boats down from Miami


on five different occasions. He is reported to be available to per.e as
captain on a fishing boat. and to train a crew.
b. The S.S. Fraugeline sails every two weeks from Miami
direct to Port Antonio, and could be employed for the delivery of supplies and
even a boat to Hobiu Yore.
c. Fred Barrett. manager of the bar-restaurant. seems to
be a very capable man. and for an additional 100 per week added to his regular
pay, would be quite willing to assist any operation.
d. A Mr. Anthony Gason. a retired British army colonel,
is the Jamaica representative to: HOBIN boats, at a place called Turtle Cove,
between Port Antonio and Blue Hole.
e. The immigration chief for Jamaica is a man by the name
of George Epubcks. who is the former chief of police at Port Antonio:'more
claims that they are very close personal friends.
d. Moore is acquainted with a man by the name of Mike Hedges,
who is a nephew of Burke Hedges. the American who became Cuba's ambassador to
Chile some years ago. Mike lives in lisingon, and, if he is not a Battista
sempathizer, might prove to be a very valuable connection. The family is re-
ported to be quite wealthy, and would establish an excellent cover.
4. Operational Considerations
a. In order to avoid a unique of significant news. I
'untreated Moore to refer to Manfred Borge Ling. and the operations of
landing him in Cuba would be to an operatioruing. The coast likely
absence seems to be a possible builtable boat at Blue Hole. with the cover
story to be that it belongs to American friends of Robin Moore. Housing is
available locally for a limited number of Cutans, with Moore being able to
accommodate up to six on his own property. The local boat capability is
Munroe. could be employed as captain initially. The company has received in
the local marine conduits, as a result of giving as an effectite cover. In
my opinion, it will not be too difficult for persons to enter Jamaica without
difficulty, provided they have been certain minimum amount of English.
The American truck has a suitable location could be found for radio
transmission and reception facilities on the hills surrounding Blue lols, but
this would have to be examined by someone skilled in radio techniques. Moteo
would be excellent.
In January, I would say that Hobin Moore and his property and
buildings at Blue Hole are as an excellent taste of operations. but that
the boat necessary for the operation would have to be acquired and equipped
in the streets and shipped down there, except for the remote possibility that
a suitable boat could be found in likugston. 1 think a headquarters could be
established at small cost through'more's good offices, and I think that Rudy
would be a good choice to coordinate the initial operations the re.
03
Jack Reed
21-353107
190


