104-10175-10133
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SUBJECTe LIHUFF-1 (Cil-
)
The attached explains the involvement
of Subject in the circuns ances surrounding
the recruitment attempt and personal harassment
of Soviet official/ABODENT (201-733422) in
June, 1968.
The marrative is presented by Feith. 06,04
Cameron JOHNSON (701-837607), Dean of. Yen
at the University of the America, who was
deeply involved in the operation. While no
apparent direct or sericus damage to LIHUFF-1
resulted from this, it must be borne in mind
that Johnson did rent his house from LIHUFF-1
and that if the Soviets ever had suspicions of
(6-3
LIHUFF-1's relacions with the Stetica L-1's
appearance in these events might be viewed
by the Soviets as possibly more than coincidence.
4123


( 2 )
LIMENDEN
After leiting
of ca a dark zide road, 1 peried by car
nearby and then walk to my lexio.
02
11-140
the
I now that the old car, which we and
and/policccon was
there, so I crept through the tubes up to the wall, clinited over the back
wall of my yard, and crept along the side keeping in the chedows and trying
to see into my house to see if anyody was in there. I finally zede my way
to the back door. Looked in and determined that there was not anybody in there,
but if there was I had every right to coss into my own house, and I found that
I was not particularly afraid so I decided to go in. I quietly opened the
back door, eage into the house, quickly looked around the corner into the
bedroom and into the bathroom, and decided that there was not anybody in there.
I walked over and closed the front door, which was wide open, quickly drew
tue drops and turned off the lights. I then changed into old clothes and
tennis shoes, got a flashlight and walked over to the kitchen window, shined
my flashlight into the face of one of the men sitting in the car just outside.
I was only able to shine it on one cens face so I held it there for a little
while then capped it off and walked back to a good corner inside the house.
There I waited with the flashlight in hand knowing that the people outside
could not enter through the front coor and if they entered through the back
'coor I'd beable to club one of thes and kick the other one before either of
them was able to do anything. I stood there and heard them coco up to the
front decor and try the front door. But, when they wore unveceesful they
didn't do any cora or coss cround to the back. They then got into their car,
started it up, turned it around and drove off. While they were turning around
I went out the back door, elibbed up on a sink, co I could see over the wall,
and watched them drive off. I didn't really know how many people were outside.
Nor did I know how many people had left in the car. Thinking that this mient
have been a decoy and that thy right have left. somebody behind. I silently
climbed up on to the roof of the house and walked across the roof and pepecu
over the cigs thinking that if there was one person left behind I quale jupi
on his from the roof and sericably injure him. There was not anybody there
LIIUFEL-1
so I left the house, walked up to the landlord's house.
1
, and
and told the family that there had beca cese cizrage people hanging around
when I cace hore, that they had langed for the car and mode an obvious attenit
1R5


( 2 )
to get at the door handle, and that I had no idea vio they were etc. I was
sufficiently scored and put the car in reverse, backed up and took 31 down
and parked it out of right. I explained that I had climbed over the back
wall and co cn. They vero quiet ware of the problem since they had observed,
or thought they had observed, people hanging around the house all day. They
pointed out to 20 too, that when their 18 year old son, B111, was riding on
horseback he encountered two nen who hed just arrived in a white Camaro driven
2
by a middleged or younger blond. ledy. They got out of their car and walked
up to my house. Ono of them, he said, was carrying a pipo and the other one
was carrying a screwdriver. The con ashed if he could help these me- but they
rushed him off saying that he couldn't. The two men pereed in the front gate
and stayed around, hanging around for quite a while until a blue Chevrolet
appeared and two people got out of it and wont inaido the house. While
these people were inside the house, the the matic inus and now near the
house.
LIHUFF-1
After spending seccetine in the house,
reported to me
two men cans out and there was some confusion going on around the car and they
couldn't seen to be able to start it. Finally, the two men who had been inside
two cen
LIJUUFF-1
the house left and the other/got in the car and left. None of the
family was exactly sure what was going on except that there was confusion
around the car. Eventually all the people left one way or another.
I said that I was very concerned about these people hanging around my
house. That I didn't like the idea of people being inside my house and I
LIHUFF-1
wasted to call the police. 'Nrs.,
said that she had called her husband
and he was cending right home, and that he had some very good contacts in
L.INDURES
and he would probably be able to help out in this matter. I
egreed to wait until he got home and that I would go and get my car and bring
it back home, which I then did. I spent the rest of the night with the
LIHUFF-1s
! visiting and as quickly as possible I moved the conversation
away from this to other completely unimportant things. I decided in the
LIHUFF-1
precence of
that there probably was not any reason to get concerned
about thin, that it was probably just some students trying to make me look
foolich or something on that order.


14/20/2000
( 3 )
One thing that I forgot to anition was that hiro.
LITHURF-1
and
upset because a tall blond men/s Mexican polieeman came up to her house after
the kids reported the people left. They reported that a car had been stolen.
She asked who the blond men was and he said he wanted to call his embassy. She
brightened up and and asked if he was an Akerion, but he said no, "UNS."
One of the kids asked if "URS" meant UJL.S.C., and he made no attespt to hide
LIIHUFF-1
the fact that he was from the Soviet Embassy. They barged in the
LIIHUFF-1
house, and in fact it was later reported that he tried to talk to Mrs.
in Russian which upset her even moro. The tall blond man used the telephone,
and as far as Hra.
knows, he dad call his embassy.
Earlier, when I arrived at the University behind the Russian car, I
told the Lt., for the University police force that I wanted the car toved
away at 9:30 the next morning if it was still there at the time. and he said
that he would be glad to if it was.
LIHUFF-1s
When I went to get my car after talking to the
around 23:70
hours. I did go down the road past the entrance to my house out to the rain
highway jut to look around. I went, dom as fer as The Lady's Bar. When I
passed the corner of the main highway and the road leading off from it to my
house, I saw a blue Chevrolet which looked very mach like the car we had. pushed
down to the University and some people standing around it including at least
one uniformed policeman. I concluded that this was connected with this case.
I went down to The Lady's Bar, turned around and came back up the main highway,
but from a point considerably below from where that car was parked until con-
siderably past it I kept a bus between those people and myself and I don't
think, on the bases of later things, that they have said, that they saw me coss
back up the bill. The bus effectively shielded no all the way up. I went
clear up to Cunjimalpa then and turned down the road that leads to my house
so I didn't have to pass them again and went on in and parked my car inside the
compound.
of The next morning I went to the University at about 8 6'look and noticed
that
DURGOMIT'S
blue Chevy was gone from the parking lot. Then I worked until
my secretary notified no that some Federal planidothes policemen were there
IDH-E
looking for
I immediately went to my office and found three or four
Federal policemen outside the office and unfortunately the Lt. of our police
LIR


