198-10009-10098 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 JFK Assassination System Date:  6/24/201 Identification Form Agency Information AGENCY:  ARMY RECORD NUMBER:  198-10009-10098 RECORD SERIES:  CALIFANO PAPERS AGENCY FILE NUMBER:  Document Information ORIGINATOR:  ARMY FROM:  JOSEPH A. CALIFANO, JR.  TO:  MULTIPLE TITLE:  ICC CA: REPORT ON STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIONS DESIGNED TO COUNTER SUBVERSION DATE:  11/26/1963 PAGES:  19 SUBJECTS:  ICC CA- SUBCOMMITTEE ON CUBAN SUBVERSION CUBAN SUBVERSION RESTRICTIONS ON TRAVEL TO AND FROM CUBA SUBCOMMITTEE ON CUBAN SUBVERSION DOCUMENT TYPE:  PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT CLASSIFICATION:  Secret RESTRICTIONS:  1 B CURRENT STATUS:  Red act DATE OF LAST REVIEW:  05/15/1998 OPENING CRITERIA:  COMMENTS:  Califano Papers, Box 2, Folder 25. Memo from Califano to Wheeler, Sloan, Alger, Wend t, Carpenter,  Quilter re: attached paper concerning status of implement ation of actions designed to counter Cuban subversion.  JFK Re vied Department of the Army E 013528 De classify Ex clude Exempt Authority Refer To Review Date 5/12/2019


SECRET
26 NOV 1963
MEMORANDUM NO. 81 FOR GENERAL EARLE G. WHEELER (JCS)
MR. FRANE K. SLOAN, Dep Asst Sec/Daf ISA
(Regional Affairs)
MAJOR GENERAL J. D. ALGER, USA
REAR ADMIRAL W. F. A. WENT, USN
MAJOR GENERAL J. W. CARPENTER. H. USAF
MIRGADIER GENERAL C. J. QUILTER, USAC
SUBJECT:
Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee of Cuban Affairs:
Report on Status of Implementation of Actions Enceigned to
Countor Subversion (U)
Reference:
DA Manna 664, subject as above. dated September 19, 1963
Attached herewith is a final draft of the Report to the President of
the Subcommittee on Cuban Subversion on Progress Made During September
1963 in Garbing Cuban Subversion in Latin America.
It is requested that comments, if any, be provided this office by
1200 hours. 2 December 1963. The Department of Defense portion of
subject report is based on submission provided in response to referenced
memorandum.
Signed
Joseph A. Califano, Jr.
Joseph A. Califano, Jr.
General Counsel
Enclosure
As stated
cc:
Mr. Yarmolinsky (OSD)
Lt Col Haig
Mr. Califano
ASG
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC REGARDING
SECRET
DOD DIR 5200.10 DOES NOT APPLY
OSA, ASC Control No. 27074
NW 50955 DocId:32424708 Page 2


DRAFT
11/13/63
SECRET
REPORT OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE
on CUDAN SUBVERSION
ACTION TAKEN DURING SEPTSEBER 1963 IN CUBRING
CURAN SUBVERSION IN LATIN AMERICA
SECRET
M3A995
Page 6


SECRET
DRAFT
11/13/63
I. Control of Travel to and From Cuba
Department of State
a. Instructed Embassy Tunis to call to the attention
of the Foreign Ministry our concern at increased evidence
of Aeroflot attempts to establish North Africa routes to
Cuba, especially through Algeria, and our conviction that
Tunisia has a valid case in thwarting any Bloc civil air
penetration of Africa.
b. Instructed Embassy Conakry to contact Guinean Govern-
ment officials, reaiding them of their past assurances
that no Aeroflot flights to Cuba would be permitted to
use Conakry facilities, and to express our concern at
resent indications that Aeroflot was preparing to establish
service to Cuba via Conakry.
c. Instructed Consulate Fort au France to investigate
and report on alleged landing and refuelling of Cubaa
aircraft at Guadeloupe. Also double-checked directly
with the Shell Company, the supplier of the fuel.
Instructed Embassy Earis to query the French Government
about alleged Cubans use of the Guadeloupe facility, and
to express our concern at this evidence of Cuba's attempt
to use French Caribbean dependencies for flights to and
From
NW 50955 Docid:32424708 Page a
SECRET


SECRET
2 -
from Latin America.
d.
Instructed Embassy Rio to make a new approach to
the Brazilian Foreign Ministry to express our concern
at Cuba's continuing use of "charter" flights to Brazil
and the laxity of Brazilian officials in the control of
passengers. During the course of the month the Brazilian
Government began tightening controls against Cubana
flights. Specifically, all requests for landing permission
were henceforth to be processed by the Foreign Office,
with appropriate delays. Also tighter passenger, crew
and cargo controls were to be instituted when a Cubans
flight is permitted to use Brazilian facilities.
e. Determined that the U.K. bad specifically warned
Cubana that no aviation fuel was available in Barbados and
that H.M.G. would, in the future, respect Shell Company's
decision to deny fueling to Cubaga planes.
f.
Continued inter-Departmental efforts to prevent
resumption of ferry service between Cuba and the U.S.
which a British citizen, Harold Berber, has been attempt-
ing to establish during the past several month.
S
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424708 Page 5


SECRET
- 3 -
8. Instructed Consul Georgetown to investigate and
report on evidence the Department received which indicates
that Cuba is planning to sell merchant vessels to British
Guisans in order to facilitate the establishment of
regular service for passengers and cargo.
Central Intelligence Agency
a. In connection with the Seventh Congress of the
International Union (UIA) held in Babens September 29 -
October 3, 1953 the Buenos Aires Station:
(1) encouraged the Argentine National Federation
of Architects to oppose Argentine attendance at the
Habana meeting, with the result that 25 of the 39
practicing architects who had planned to attend can-
called their participation;
(2) arranged to prevent the attendance of any
officially authorized Argentine delegation at the Mabana
meeting, but encouraged the attendance of an official
Argentine delegation of anti-Communist coloration at an
international architecture meeting to be held in Mexico
in October;
(3)
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424708 Page 6


SECRET
- 4 -
(3) delivered a memorandum to the Minister of
Interior concerning Cuban charter flights to Brazil which
supported the Ambassador's request that the Argentine
government express concern over such flights.
b. Rio de Janeiro Station continued to furnish
the Embassy with data on Cubana flights to Brazil used
in representations to the Brazilian Foreign Office.
Also induced Rio airport officiais to impose stringent
passport control and baggage efforts. These efforts
contributed to the Brazilian Government's failing to
issue landing permits for Cubana flights on September
21, 24 and 25, 1963 forcing their cancellation. When
Cubana, because of harassment at Rio, began using the
landing facilities in Sao Paulo where controls were
non existent, CIA initiated and obtained a local liaison
agreement for similar harassment in the event of future
Cubana flights to Sao Paulo.
c. Mexico City station inspired a press campaign
of hoof and mouth and smalipox epidemics in Cuba, prior
to the Architects Congress to discourage participation
in the Habana meeting. The resulting quarantines and
innoculation
SECRET
NW 50955 Docid: 32424708 Page 7


5
innoculations were a factor in discouraging 52 of the
60 Mexican professional architects who were expected to
go to Habana from attending the Congress.
II. Control of Novement of Propaganda
Wearner to commer act
NW 50955 DocId:32424708 Page 8


LIL. Control of Glancestine Movement of Guerrillas
and arms
Department of State
Made the necessary arrangements through Embassy
Tegucigalpa with the Government of Honduras for the
dispatch of three U.S. helicopters to give logistical
assistance to the Honduran Army in its effort to locate
and eliminate the band of guerrillas allegedly operating
in the Fatuca River area along the Honduran-Bicaraguan
border.
Department of Defense
Three OH-13 helicopters from USSOUTHCOM supported
Honduran surned forces conducting counter-insurgency
operations in the Patuca River area. A total of 27 sorties
were flown resulting in delivery of 3023 pounds of supplies,
evacuation of 12 sick Honduran soldiers, airlift of 19
passengers to points in the operational area, and
recovery of 400 pounds of supplies from the operational
area.
IV.
SECRET
NW 50955 Docid:32424708 Page 9


SECRET
- 7 -
IV.
Control of Transfer of Funds
Department of State
a. Instructed Embassy Mexico City to inform the
Mexican airline SAESA that their proposal to purchase
surplus Cuban aircraft would in fact result in the
accrual to Cuba of a significant amount of hard currency,
and the U.S. would have to oppose the transaction.
Further, if dollars were involved in the purchase,
it would be a violation of the Cuban Assets Control
Regulations.
b. Informed Department of Treasury, Foreign Assets
Control Office, of the activities of Somondelp Enterprises,
a Miami firm engaged in sending remittances to persons
in Cale in violation of the Cuban Assets Control
Regulations.
c. Instructed Consulate, Belize to inform
Mr. Richard Joyce, an American national, that his
commercial transactions with Cuba were in violation
of the Cuban Assets Control Regulations and that he
is prohibited from engaging in such trade.
V.
SECRET
NW 50955. DocId:32424708. Page 10


SECRET
- 3 -
V. Strengthening of Counter-Insurzency Capabilities
Department of Defense
a. Thirteen Latin American officers graduated from
the counter-insurgency Operations Course of the U.S.
Army School for Latin America in the Panama Canal Zone
on 20 September. During the month, a total of 91 Latin
American officers enrolled in courses stressing counter-
insurgency at the Army Canal Zone school.
b. Eight U.S. Army counter-insurgency mobile
training teams were providing training to the Armed
Forces of five Latin American countries during the period.
U.S. Air Force counter-insurgency training teams were
in two countries.
c. In the Canal Zone, 15 students from five countries
were under instruction in the operation of coast guard
utility patrol craft used for coastal surveillance.
Six students from two countries were undergoing similar
training in the UnitedStates
d. A U.S. Navy counter-insurgency training team
is in Venezuela to assist in improving the security
of oil installations in Lake Marcaibo.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424708 Page 11


SECRET
"
e. Costa Rica and Honduras were provided one
Gessa 185 aircraft each for medical civic action and
internal security purposes.
6. On May 25, 1953, three M-438 KAMAN helicopters
were provided to the government of Colombia on a 90-day
loan. The Colombian Government requested an extension
of the loan and a 90-day extension has boan approved.
Central Intelligence Agency
a. Cunitana no City Station has recruited, on a
trial basis, a former member of the 13 November guerrilla
group and debriefinge are in process. Negotiations
continue with the Government of Guatemala for the
formation of a new internal security service.
b. Lina Station has agreed to furnish the Peruvian
Investigations Police (FIP) with an outboard motor
to increase their patrol capability on rivers crossing
the Bolivian frontier. Our information is that the
rivera crossing this frontier have provided the primary
avenues for recent attempts to gain clandestine entry
of personnel and weapons into Peru.
VI.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424708 Page 12


STORIT
- 10 -
VI. Exchance of Intelligence on Cuban Subversion
Department of Defense
Engineering installation work continued on radio
stations for Managua, Nicaragua and Tegucigalpa,
Honduras. No further progress has been made in reaching
agreements with Colombia and Ecuador for rights to
establish radio stations in those countries. Installation
of the new trans-istimian commercial cable in Panama
is nearing completion.
General Intelligence Aromcy
CIA Stations continued their exchange of intelligence
information with local intelligence agencies. The
following actions are of special significance:
a. The CIA Station in Beranos Aires furnished the
Argentines State Tatelligence Service (SIBE) with
information on the travel of Argentines to Cuba, and re-
quested that SIDE provide name traces and debrief these
travelles on their return whenever feasible. SIDE
provided the traces, but did not conduct any debriefings.
The Station has not Gelt it feasible to try to remedy
this omission in view of the personnel changes expected
within SIDE after the new government is installed on
NW 50955 Dociid:3120 Doutionne 13
SECRET
b.


SEURET
- 11 -
b. As a result of information passed by the Bogota
Station to the Administrative Department of Security
(DAS) concerning Colombian travelers to Cuba, a number
of passport violations have been discovered in which
traveliers to Cuba are using passports issued to other
persons. There is a reluctance, however, on the part
of the Colombian Government to prosecute this type
of violation.
c. At the urging of the GIA Station in Linu, the
National Intelligence Service (SIN) instructed one of
its penetrations of leftist groups to campaign for a trip
to Cuba in order to receive guerrilla varfare training.
This asset has been offered, and has accepted, an opportunity
to make the trip by the leftist Revolutionary Hovement
(DIS), primary vehicle of Cuban subversive activities
in Peru. Briefing and debriefing of the asset will be
done by the SIN.
The Feruvian Naval Intelligence Service (FIS) has,
in response to the efforts of the Station in Lima, sent
one of its agents to Chile where he will sign aboard a
Chilican freighter calling at Habana. The asset has been
given specific intelligence requirements to fulfill.
The
NW 50955 Dociid:32424708 Page 14
SECRET


SECRET
12
The Prime Minister and Minister of Government and
Police has requested from the CIA representative in
Lima any information that he might supply on subversive
elements posing a threat to the Government of Vero.
This request has opened an additional channel to the
highest level of the Government with a concomitant
prospection effective action when needed.
d. Through regular limison channels, the Venezuela
General Directorate of Police (DICEPOL) has been provided
by CIA with the names of all Venezuela known to have
travelled to Cuba from Betruary through August 1963.
This activity will be carried out on a continuing basis;
the names are now being integrated into the regular
watch list kept at international airports in Venezuela.
Thus far, at least three returnees have been arrested
on the basis of the information supplied to DIEGEL.
DIEGEL has indicated its appreciation of the data
being supplied and desires that the arrangement be
continued.
VII. and Cullman Diplomatic. Commerciel and Cultural
Missions
No special actions to report.
VII.
8
80955 DocId: 32424708 Page. 15
SECRET


SEURRI
- 13 -
VIII. Other Special Actions
United States Information Agency
a. The Agency's press service transmitted seven
articles relating to Cuban subversion on its wireless
file service to USIS offices throughout Latin America
for placement in the local newspapers. Developments
reported in these articles included demands by the Bolivian
Senate for the ouster of the Cuban Chargé d'Affaires,
terrorism and government counteraction in Venezuela,
the seizure in Ecuador of an arms and explosives cache
reportedly received from Cuba, several articles on the
International Union of Architects Congrese in Habera
(emphasizing the intent of the Gastro regime to use the
Congress as a forum for its propaganda claims), and
Assistant Secretary Hertzia's Los Angeles speech in which
he pointed out the regime's affinity for Chinese communist
doctrine and its continued emphasis on violent revolution
and subversion. In all, the press service tranemitted
27 articles and commentaries during September on the
subject of Cuba, the other articles dealing for the most
part with economic and political conditions inside the
country as evidenced by the regime's own admissions and
the reports of refugees.
NW 50955
DODL:32424708
Page 16
SECRET
b.
-


SECRET
14
B. The Voice of America Spanish broadcasts to Latin
America during September carried a total of 20 news
analyses, commentaries, press round-ups, and interviews
related to the subject of Cuban subversion. Some of
the developments treated included the following:
A commeritary on commeriee embases as channels for
subversion; a news analysis on the U.S. students who
visited Cuba; Assistant Secretary Martin's Los Angeles
speech; a news analysis on Cuban subversion as an obstacle
in the normalization of U.S. Soviet relations; a three-
part series on university autonomy in Latin America;
a Seatture on the letter of a Colombian student who
want to Cuba on a scholarship and was disillusioned by
the communist indoctrination; a commentary on the Guevara's
recent article on revolutionary strategy; and a commentary
on guerilie training in Cuba. Many of these items were
repeated several times in the broadcasts. The "Nandervous
with Cuba" hour carried four or five commentaries then
with and interviews mightly on economic and political
developments inside Cuba. of special note, the Cuban
media and Castro himself reacted angrily to Voice of
A
America broadcasts about the Mavera's article and to com-
mentaries that Cuba had accepted an agricultural role in
NW 50955 DocId: 32424708 Page 17
SECRET
the


STCRRIT
15 -
the communist bloc and had postponed its plans to
industriolize.
c. On September 27, the Agency issued a circular
instruction to allilts Latin American posts urging
greater attention to opportunities for publicizing Cuban
sticulated suiverion, suggesting the various types of
information activities to support this effort, and requesting
monthly reports of field actions taken to implement the
instruction. This was done as a follow-up to the original
instruction on Subon subversion which was issued April 3,
1963.
Central Intelligence Agency
a. GIA in Brasilieassisted in the defection and
exploitation of a Cuban athelote Roberto Perez Gudarse
in Porto Alegre on 4 September 1963. Pater was a member
of the Cuban basketball team which participated in the
Worid University Gance (FISU) held in Forto Alegre
Brazil in early September 1963.
b. Assistance was given to the Government of
Gantemala in the interrogation of some of those who
were arrested in connection with the Comminist Party
documents that were confiscated in late May 1963.
CIGRET
Only
NW 50955 DocId: 32424708 Page 18


SECRET
- 16 -
Only one of those interrogated admitted to any involvement
with the captured documents, the Communist Party,
guerilies, or angthing else that could be construed
as incriminating. The one who did admit knowledge
denied that he was involved in any way. The Government
of Guatemala wants to interrogate this person again at
a later date.
c. CIA Station in Montevideo arranged for an
interview between an Uruguayan military intelligence
officer and a recent defector from the Montevideo
Cuban Embassy during which extensive information regarding
Cuban subversive activities was ravcaled. The Uruguayan
officer prepared a report containing this data and
presented it to the National Council of Covarmment which
has been slow to indicate concern over communist sub-
versive activity in Uruguay. As a result of this report,
the MCG has directed the Minister of Interior to appoint
a special commission to study the problem of Consunist
subversion and to make recommendations as to what course
of action should be taken by the Durguayan Government.
Should the Government wish to press for passage of
stronger
NW 50955 DocId: 32424708 Page 19


STORRE
17
stronger anti-subversive legislation the Station has taken
steps to prepare Truguyan public opinion by planning
similanteous local press releases of the salient
features of the defector report with similar press
reporting in the United States where the defector will be
brought to light.
SECEIT
NW 50955 DocId:32424708 Page 20


