198-10007-10013 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 JFK Assassination System Date:  6/24/201 Identification Form Agency Information AGENCY:  ARMY RECORD NUMBER:  198-10007-10013 RECORD SERIES:  CALIFANO PAPERS AGENCY FILE NUMBER:  Document Information ORIGINATOR:  FROM:  TO:  TITLE:  CONTROL OF TRAVEL TO AND FROM CUBA DATE:  00/00/0000 PAGES:  17 SUBJECTS:  CONTROL OF TRANSFER OF FUNDS CONTROL OF MOVEMENT OF CUBAN PROPAGANDA CONTROL OF CLANDESTINE MOVEMENT OF GUERRILLAS AND ARMS EXCHANGE OF INTELLIGENCE ON CUBAN SUBVERSION SURVEILLANCE OF CUBAN DIPLOMATIC, COMMERCIAL AND CULTURAL MISSIONS STRENGTHENING OF COUNTER- INSURGENCY CAPABILITIES DOCUMENT TYPE:  PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT CLASSIFICATION:  Secret RESTRICTIONS:  1 B; 4 CURRENT STATUS:  Red act DATE OF LAST REVIEW:  04/09/1998 OPENING CRITERIA:  COMMENTS:  Califano Papers, Box 4, Folder 6. Draft report concerning control of access to and surveillance of Cuba.  Department of the Army EO 13526 p Decis a sly 12 Exempt NO STATE OBJECTION Authority:  TO DE ASSIFICATION Refer To By DATE 6/14/16 Review Date 13515 By 144449 9.1 22 NW 50955 Doc Id: 32424006 Page 1


DRAFT
SEGRET
2 of 9 copies
Group I
Tobluded from automatig
1. Control of Travel to and from Cuba
voussification
Central Intelligence Aveney
a. Developed highly useful information on frequency
of Cuban "chartered" flights to Brazil, names and nationalities
of passengers and crew, and lax measures of control followed
by Brazilian authorities. Transmitted this information to
station chiefs in the Lotin American countries of the non-
Strazilians travelling on these flights.
b. Maintained close watch over travel to and from
Cuba. See Annex B for table of known travel of Latin Americans
during July and August.
c. As a result of information furnished by him by the
CIA Station in Buenos Aires and with the Station's urging, the
Argentine Minister of Interior indicated that he would make
every effort to prevent Argentine delegates from attending the
International Union of Architects Congress to Havana.
d. At the urging of the CIA Station and the Nubasey
the Bolivian Minister of Interior issued in mid-July an order
prohibiting the granting of travel permits to Cuba on other
bloc countries to Bolivian nationals.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 2


SECRET
-2-
e. Fartly as a result of the efforts of the GIA
station in Santiago, the Government of Chile prohibited the
entry into Chile of organizers of the Cuban consorad Second
Latin American Youth Congress, which had been scheduled to take
place in Santiago in August. This was one of the factors which
led to postponment of the Congress.
E. After considerable prodding by the GIA Station
and the Embassy the Minister of Public Security of Costa Rica
has presented legislative proposals to the Costa Rican Assembly
which will require all persons intending to travel to Communist
countries to have their travel approved by a newly created
Costa Rican security agency.
8. GIA Station in Mexico City developed information
concerning the clandestine arrival of passengers in Vera Cura
on Cuban merchant shipe. Efforts are being made to obtain more
information and to encourage stricter control by the Mexican
authorities.
Department of State
a. Instructed Embassy Coaktry to try to persuade
Guinean authorities to deny use of airport facilities by flights
on Habana-Mosco route. These efforts achieved a temporary
withholding of permission for future regular flights, at least
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 3


SECRET
-3-
until such time as the Soviets develop their own refueling facilities
at Comakry.
b. Instructed Embassy Rio to approach Brazilian
authorities to express our deep concern at the growing frequency
of Cumban non-scheduled flights to Brazil and request their
cooperation in curbing them. Also instructed our Embassies
in several Latin American countries to work with CIA atation
chiefes in furnishing the names of nationais of those countries
traveling on these flights to local authorities and urging
them: (1) to institute tighter controls on their own citizens
traveling to Cuba, and (2) to express their concern to the
Government
Brazil's over Duan use of Brazil as a way station
for transporting subversives.
c. As a result of representations made to the British
government about Cuban flights to the Cayman Islands carrying
Latin American subversives, the British developed an administrative
scheme which will effectively prohibit the use of British
Caribbean dependencies by Cubaa as transit points for passengers.
The British intend to require transit viasa of passengers passing
through their areas, and to reject applications for such visas
except in certain special cases. Persons not possessing viasa
would be prevented from leaving their aircraft, or would be
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 4


SECRET
-40
returned to their point of origin.
d. Instructed Embassy Manico City on August 29 to
inform the Nenican airlino DA that the United States is
opposed to a proposal that CMA operate charter flights to esrry
refugees from Havana to Central America. CMA, as a result,
stated that they had no intention of proceeding further with
this project.
e. Instructed U.S. Mission in Curaçoo and the Ha gua
to investigate a report that KIM was planning to renew all
scheduled Curaçoo-Naban flights and to reiterate US opposition
to resumption of air service to Cuba. KIM asserted our Embassy
that there is no plan to initiate service, scheduled or non-
scheduled, to Habana.
f. Instructed Embassy Ottawa to express our strong
objections to a proposal that a Cabane charter flight pick up
a second group of U.S. statutes in Montreal to fly them to Cuba.
The flight was not authorized.
g. Instructed Consulate Georgetown to investigate
Cubans approaches to secure flight facilities. Mission reported
on August 1 that the Governor had no knowledge of any talus
between the B.G. Ministery of Communications and the Cuban Governor
ment regarding landing rights for Guiana planes. The Governor
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 5


BZCRIT
15
indicated the intention to inquire further and to heep us
advised. London reported that neither the Chansar or the British
Culane Governmente had raised the issue of Landing rights with
HillG.
h. Urged the governmenta of kinder, Canada, Jamaica
and the Netherlands to refusé to assist the Chuan government
in its effertes to find a short route for return of the So American
students who illegally travelled to Chun. Also informed Pan
American Airways that we were opposed to a Chuan request for
a RAJ character flight to fly the students from Human to How York.
1. Instructed our mission at Fort of Spain and
Barbados on several occasions to approach these governments to
express the concern of the U.S. at indications of Chuan interest
in the use of their aviation facilities.
Hunshay Fort of Spain discussed with the Foreign Secretary
of Trinidad vortous legal moves available that would enable
CUT to control movements of aircraft within their territory,
aiting examples of such controls instituted by Mince, Canada
and Ircleland. He indicated reappitiveness to the proposal that
the list of suggestions be made available to the aviation officials
concerned.
J. Bursing a previous reporting period Hunbasy Statistics
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 6


SECREST
G
urged the govarment of Chile te refuse visas to Cuban delegates
to a preparatory meeting planning for the Ix Intin American
Youth Congress scheduled for August in the Chilean capital.
Inability of Cuban delegates to obtain ChilEan vises for this
meeting is one of the contributing factors to the ChilAn sponsors
announcing during August that the meeting had been postponed.
h. Sent general instructions to our missions in countries
which participate in the International Inion of Architects asking
then to urge the cooperation of governmental authorities in
preventing or discouraging the attendance of their citizens to
the VII UIA Congress in Tabana, September 29 October 4. 1963.
Followed this up with instructions to individual posts to try
where feasible to dissuade architectures from free world countries
from serving on the jury for the selection of a Buy of Figs
mountant.
1. Urged Canadian Government to block a plan to
concense food parcel shipments to Chila, on a Commercial hests,
that would have required the establishment of scheduled weekly
charter flights by Canadian planes.
SINATIT
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 7


SECRET
-7-
2. Saptrol of Movement of Cuber Propascada
Central Intelligence Agency
Responding to the urging of the CIA Station police
of the State of Guanabara seized large quantities of propa-
ganda brought into Brazil by passengers on the special Cubana
flights. For example, some 50 pounds of printed propaganda
was taken from the various passengers who arrived on the 16
August Cubana flight.
3. Control of Closdactine Movement of Gurorillas and Arns
Department of Defense
a. Continued surveillance of the area surrounding Cuba
during the month of July at the same rate and with the same
emphasis as prior to 1 July 1963.
b. Continued to maintain U.S. Forces, primarily from
within the Atlantic Command, available to assist other Caribbean
governments in the interception of suspicious craft in
territorial waters, as might be requested. No such requests were
received from any other government during the period covered by
this report. However, U.S. Forces did keep track of the
location of the Soviet merchant freighter MITCHURINSK, which
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 8


SECRET
-8-
was suspected of carrying subversives and ams from Cuba to
British Guiana in wild-July MITCHURINEK was under U.S.
surveillance from its departure from Havane until United
Kingdom forces assumed the task of keeping this ship under
surveillance upon its approach to Georgetown, British Guiana.
Subsequently, British police search of MITCHURINEK in British
Guiana waters revealed nothing of a suspicious nature.
Central Intelligence Agency
At the repeated urging of the CIA Station in Lima
the Peruvian Government late in August published a new anti-
terrorists law providing a penalty of no less than five years
imprisonment for persona who particulate in guerrilla activities
or in the illegal manufacture of weapons or explosives.
The Peruvian National Intelligence Service is working
on a lead furnished by the C14 Station in Lima concerning a
200 ton vessel reportedly involved in anne traffic.
Department of State
Instructed our Consulate General in Georgetown to
investigate reports that commercial cargoes (which could conceal
illicit arms traffic out of Cuba) had developed between British
Guiana and Cuba. Investigations to date have been negative.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 9


SECRET
-9-
4. Control of Transfer of Funda
Resartment of State
Cooperated with the Foreign Asseas Control Office of
the Treasury Department in developing blocking controls with
respect to Cuba which went into effect on July 9, 1963.
5. Statements of Counter-Insurgency Capabilities
Department of Defence
a. Continued the installation of military communica-
tions facilities in Latin America. Operational dates for the
multi-channel radio stations to be installed in Managua.
Nicaragua and Tegucisigma, Honduras have been delayed to 15
October 1963 and 16 December 1963, respectively because of new
engineering and contractual requirements. Negotiation are
continuing with Colombia and Ecuador for installation of U.S.
military radio facilities. Completion of a new commercial trans-
isthman cable in the Panama Canal Zone within the coming month
is expected to improve military communications within the
United States and the Commander-in-Chief, U.S. Southern Command.
b. Continued the surveillance of Cuba by U.S. Forces,
reporting as before to U.S. commanders, organizations and agencies.
SHORT
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 10


SECRET
+10-
Reports of survallence have been disseminated to all who have
a requirement to know.
c. Established a 24 hour per day, 7 days per week duty
wath at the U.S. Miltory Groups in the Caribbean countries in
conjunction with implementation of the military alerting system.
Continued efforts to staff the U.S. Southern Command Intelligence
Center with properly cleared, trained personnel (this center is
the military focal point for relaying information concerning
the movement of subversives). Filled, partially, the authorized
billets in the U.S. Southern Command Intelligence Center and
took under consideration the probien of an increase in the biliet
structure in the Center. The Commander-in-Chief, U.S. Southern
Comand together with his intelligence officer visited Honduras
and Nicaragua and determined that no significant problems existed
which would interfere with effective operations in those
countries.
d. Action previously initiated by the Commander, U.S.
Naval Forces, Southern Comand (CCHUSNAVSO) to establish a Small
Craft Inspection and Training Team (SCIATT) as a contribution to
the Caribbean Surveillance System is progressing satisfactorily.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 11


SECRET
-11-
Fermment assignment of U.S. Coast Guard personnel to SCIATT
in the Canal Zone has been approved and the U.S. Coast Guard
has taken appropriate implementing sections.
a. During the period of this report, the SCIATT con-
ducted an -tio--job training course at Puntarenes, Costa
Rica. Training was given to 13 members of the Guardia Civil
of Costa Rica who were either newly assigned to the 40 foot
Coast Guard utility boats (CUBO) or were to be assigned as
replacement crew numbers.
E. A quarterly inspection and evaluation of the GUBS
provided other Central American countries was conducted during
the period 17 to 31 August by a mobile training team (MTT)
made up of SCIATT personnel.
8. Continued efforts to improve the internal security
of Latin American armies through the provision of Intelligence
Advisors. Presently there are such advieors assigned to 14
Latin countries, emphasizing counterintelligence and counter-
subversion.
h. During the reporting period MTE conducted training
in counteninsurgency for the named forces of Colombia, Bolivia,
Venezuela, Peru and Ei Salvador.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 12


EICERT
-12-
1. Civic Action HTS were sent to Guatemala, Bolivia,
Colombia, 31 Salvador, Janaica and Ecuador.
6. Exchange of Intelligence on Cuban Subvareion
General Intelligence Aconey
CIA Statious throughout Latin America continued in a
great majority of countries to furnish to the local internal
security organizations with whom they are in liaison informa-
tion concerning travelers to and from Cuba, as well as such
information as came to CIA's attention concerning the movement
of funds, arms and propaganda material. In many instances, the
furnishing of information to the internal security service by
the CIA Station was paralleled by the furnishing of similar
information to the foreign office by the Ambassador or his
representative. The response to this information has varied
greatly. The Central American countries, in general, began to
pay attention to the information and take action on it. At the
during the reporting period
other extreme, the Brazilian Government/ahowad little inclination
to follow up on the information.
Department of State
a. Reitereted to the Foreign Minister of Peru our
interest in having the facts of the Puerto Maldonado incident
SHEET
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 13


SEVENT
-19-
brought to the attention of the DAS, and argued that this action
be taken as soon as possible.
b. Urged the Government of Sustainable to submit evidence
of community activity to the QAS.
7. Surveillance of Stinn Political and Cultural
Riesland.
Central Intelligencey Account
To be filled in by m. wheels)
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 14


SECRET
-14-
Department of State
Instructed Embassy Is Pas to follow up closely on
charges of involvement of Cuban mission in internal polities
of Hollivia, and, at the Embeacy's discretion, to point out to
Bolivion officiala the opportunity for a possible break in
relations with Cuba. Embassy Le Pan was not able to press
for a break when the evidence of Cuban intervention did not
prove to be as conclusivo as originally reported.
S. Other Insucial Actions
Department of State
a. Obtained action by the COAS on July 3 on the Lavalle
Committee Report transmitting the document to the governments
and surging them to implement the specific and general recon-
mendation contained therein as soon as possible.
b. Through Hubsay language informed the Nienzsgman
Government of the matters which we wanted the have considered
during the informal mecting of the Ministers of Security and
interior of the Ietthdian countries held in Managua, August
26-28 in preparation for the second formal meeting of the
Nanagua Security Conference countries later this year.
SHERET
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 15


SECRET
15-
c. Reassured Freslident Sehick of Kicaragua in the
must agyphatic terms that the Nuclear Test Ban Tresy did not
mean that our attitude toward Castro has altered in the
olightest, and stressed our interest in seeing steady progress
by all the Isthion countries in implementing the recommenda-
tions of the Managua Security Conference to block Cuban
subversive efforts.
d. Explained in detail the nature of the Cuban threat
and the related policy objectives of the U.S., during conversion-
tion in London and in Washington with Mr. Adam Watson, newly
spontated British Ambassador to Cuba.
United States Inkoration Agency
a. The Agency's press service during the reporting
period transmitted 12 articles, commentaries, and backgrounders
on its vireless file service to NIIA posts throughout Latin
America for placement in the local newspapers and the Voice of
America Spanish broadcasts to Latin America carried a total of
28 commentaries and features on the subject of Cuban-based
subversion in addition to the regular reporting of developments
in the hourly newcasts.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 16


SHORT
-16-
b. In response to standing Agency instructions to give
special attention to developments related to Chis-based
subversion, USIS poste in Latin America were prompt in reporting
incidents and in providing editorial comments from the Latin
American press, all of which was used in the Agency's radio and
press output.
The main developments treated in the Agency's radio and
press coverage included Castro's July 26 speech urging revolu-
tions in Latin America, the discovery of terrorist weapons
of
factories in Gueyaguli, the Educational Vice President's assumption
of Cuban responsibility for terrorism, the statement by State
Department Press Officer Richard Phillips that "potential
subversive agents" from Cuba to the Caribbean area were passing
through Gran Cayman, the compilation of a Bolivian youth leader
for receiving funds from Cuba, Castro-trained terrorists in
and
Honduras, / Bolivian protects against middling by the Cuban Embassy
in the miner's strike. A Voice of America roving reporter in
Latin America provided several reports affumaries on the
subversalion picture in countries he vioited.
c. In support of the Agency's effort on Cuban-based
subversal, the publications center in Merice began work on
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 17


SECRET
17
three pamphlets during the period based on Castro's report of
his visit to the Soviet Union (shoving that the contradicted
himself in some of his interrogant claims of Soviet progress),
the losses suffered by Cuban labor under Castro, and the fate
of political prisoners in Cuba. When completed, these pamphlets
will be reproduced and distributed in quantity throughout the
area.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 18


